New York State Testing Program
Grade 7
English Language Arts Test
Released Questions
June 2019
New York State administered the English Language Arts Tests in
April 2019 and is now making approximately 75% of the
questions from these tests available for review and use.
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program
Grades 3–8 English Language Arts
Released Questions from 2019 Exams
Background
In 2013, New York State began administering tests designed to assess student performance in accordance
with the instructional shifts and rigor demanded by the new New York State P-12 Learning Standards in
English Language Arts (ELA). To help in this transition to new assessments, the New York State Education
Department (SED) has been releasing an increasing number of test questions from the tests that were
administered to students across the State in the spring. This year, SED is again releasing large portions of
the 2019 NYS Grades 3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics test materials for review, discussion, and
use.
For 2019, included in these released materials are at least 75 percent of the test questions that appeared
on the 2019 tests (including all constructed-response questions) that counted toward students’ scores.
Additionally, SED is providing information about the released passages; the associated text complexity for
each passage; and a map that details what learning standards each released question measures and the
correct response to each question. These released materials will help students, families, educators, and the
public better understand the tests and the New York State Education Department’s expectations for
students.
Understanding ELA Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P-12 Learning Standards in English
Language Arts. These questions ask students to analyze different aspects of a given text, including central
idea, style elements, character and plot development, and vocabulary. Almost all questions, including
vocabulary questions, will be answered correctly only if the student comprehends and makes use of the
whole passage.
For multiple-choice questions, students select the correct response from four answer choices. Multiple-
choice questions assess reading standards in a variety of ways. Some ask students to analyze aspects of text
or vocabulary. Many questions require students to combine skills. For example, questions may ask students
to identify a segment of text that best supports the central idea. To answer these questions correctly, a
student must first comprehend the central idea and then show understanding of how that idea is supported.
Questions tend to require more than rote recall or identification.
Short-Response Questions
Short-response questions are designed to assess New York State P-12 Reading and Language Standards.
These are single questions in which a student uses textual evidence to support his or her answer to an
inferential question. These questions ask the student to make an inference (a claim, position, or conclusion)
based on his or her analysis of the passage, and then provide two pieces of text-based evidence to support
his or her answer.
The purpose of the short-response questions is to assess a student’s ability to comprehend and analyze
text. In responding to these questions, students are expected to write in complete sentences. Responses
require no more than three complete sentences. The rubric used for evaluating short-response questions
can be found in the grade-level Educator Guides at https://www.engageny.org/resource/test-guides-
english-language-arts-and-mathematics.
Extended-Response Questions
Extended-response questions are designed to measure a student’s ability to write from sources. Questions
that measure Writing from Sources prompt students to communicate a clear and coherent analysis of one
or two texts. The comprehension and analysis required by each extended response is directly related to
grade-specific reading standards. Student responses are evaluated on the degree to which they meet grade-
level writing and language expectations. This evaluation is made by using a rubric that incorporates the
demands of grade-specific New York State P-12 Reading and Language standards.
The integrated nature of the standards for ELA and literacy requires that students are evaluated across the
strands (Reading, Writing, and Language) with longer pieces of writing, such as those prompted by the
extended-response questions. The rubric used for evaluating extended-response questions can be found in
the grade-level Educator Guides at https://www.engageny.org/resource/test-guides-english-language-
arts-and-mathematics.
New York State P-12 Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment(s) to the New York State P-12 Learning Standards for English Language Arts is/are intended
to identify the analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. However, some questions
measure proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and
language standards. For example, two-point and four-point constructed-response questions require
students to first conduct the analyses described in the mapped standard and then produce written
responses that are rated based on writing standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus
for constructed-response questions, please refer to the rubrics.
These Released Questions Do Not Comprise a “Mini Test”
To ensure future valid and reliable tests, some content must remain secure for possible use on future
exams. As such, this document is not intended to be representative of the entire test, to show how
operational tests look, or to provide information about how teachers should administer the test; rather, its
purpose is to provide an overview of how the test reflects the demands of the New York State P-12 Learning
Standards.
The released questions do not represent the full spectrum of the standards assessed on the State tests, nor
do they represent the full spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in the classroom.
It should not be assumed that a particular standard will be measured by an identical question in future
assessments. Specific criteria for writing test questions, as well as additional assessment information, are
available at http://www.engageny.org/common-core-assessments.
2019 Grade 7 ELA Test Text Complexity Metrics for
Released Questions Available on EngageNY
Selecting high-quality, grade-appropriate passages requires both objective text
complexity metrics and expert judgment. For the Grades 3–8 assessments based on the
New York State P-12 Learning Standards for English Language Arts, both quantitative
and qualitative rubrics are used to determine the complexity of the texts and their
appropriate placement within a grade-level ELA exam.
Quantitative measures of text complexity are used to measure aspects of text
complexity that are difficult for a human reader to evaluate when examining a text.
These aspects include word frequency, word length, sentence length, and text cohesion.
These aspects are efficiently measured by computer programs. While quantitative text
complexity metrics are a helpful start, they are not definitive.
Qualitative measures are a crucial complement to quantitative measures. Using
qualitative measures of text complexity involves making an informed decision about the
difficulty of a text in terms of one or more factors discernible to a human reader
applying trained judgment to the task. To qualitatively determine the complexity of a
text, educators use a rubric composed of five factors; four of these factors are required
and one factor is optional. The required criteria are: meaning, text structure, language
features, and knowledge demands. The optional factor, graphics, is used only if a
graphic appears in the text.
To make the final determination as to whether a text is at grade-level and thus
appropriate to be included on a Grades 3–8 assessment, New York State uses a two-step
review process, which is an industry best-practice. First, all prospective passages
undergo quantitative text complexity analysis using three text complexity measures. If
at least two of the three measures suggest that the passage is grade-appropriate, the
passage then moves to the second step, which is the qualitative review using the text-
complexity rubrics. Only passages that are determined appropriate by at least two of
three quantitative measures of complexity and are determined appropriate by the
qualitative measure of complexity are deemed appropriate for use on the exam.
For more information about text selection, complexity, and the review process please
refer to:
https://www.engageny.org/resource/new-york-state-passage-selection-resources-
for-grade-3-8-assessments
https://www.engageny.org/resource/selection-of-authentic-texts-for-common-core-
instruction-guidance-and-a-list-of-resources
https://www.engageny.org/resource/december-2014-nti-understanding-text-
complexity-grades-9-12
Text Complexity Metrics for 2019 Grade 7 Passages
Passage Title Word
Count
Lexile
Flesch-Kincaid
Reading Maturity
Metric*
Degrees of
Reading Power*
Qualitative
Review
Excerpt from Winds of Hope 1002 980L 7 57 Appropriate
Excerpt from The Wednesday Wars 913 1000L 7 58 Appropriate
Antarctica's Hidden Wetland: From Ice to ET 955 940L 8.1 62 Appropriate
At Dusk 205
N/A,
poem
N/A,
poem
N/A,
poem
Appropriate
Excerpt from Marine Mammals in Captivity 472 1100L 9 64 Appropriate
Excerpt from What Zoo Critics Don't
Understand 362 1150L 10 67
Appropriate
* Depending on when the passage was selected, either the Reading Maturity Metric or Degrees of Reading Power was
used as the third quantitative metric.
New York State 2019 Quantitative Text Complexity Chart for Assessment and Curriculum
To determine if a text’s quantitative complexity is at the appropriate grade level, New
York State uses the table below. In cases where a text is excerpted from a large work,
only the complexity of the excerpt that students see on the test is measured, not the
large work, so it is possible that the complexity of a book might be above or below grade
level, but the text used on the assessment is at grade level. Because the measurement
of text complexity is inexact, quantitative measures of complexity are defined by grade
band rather than by individual grade level and then paired with the qualitative review by
an educator.
Grade
Band ATOS
Degrees of
Reading
Power Flesch-Kincaid
The Lexile
Framework
Reading
Maturity SourceRater
2nd–3rd 2.75 – 5.14 42 – 54 1.98 – 5.34 420 – 820 3.53 – 6.13 0.05 – 2.48
4th–5th 4.97 – 7.03 52 – 60 4.51 – 7.73 740 – 1010 5.42 – 7.92 0.84 – 5.75
6th–8th 7.00 – 9.98 57 – 67 6.51 – 10.34 925 – 1185 7.04 – 9.57 4.11 – 10.66
9th–10th 9.67 – 12.01 62 – 72 8.32 – 12.12 1050 – 1335 8.41 – 10.81 9.02 – 13.93
11th–12th 11.20 – 14.10 67 – 74 10.34 – 14.20 1185 – 1385 9.57 – 12.00 12.30 – 14.50
Source: Student Achievement Partners
RELEASED QUESTIONS
Excerpt from “Winds of Hope” by Katy Duffield, Cricket, September 2012. Copyright © 2012 by Cricket Media. Published by Open Court
Publishing Co. Used with permission of Carus Publishing Company via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from The Wednesday Wars by Gary D. Schmidt. Copyright © 2007 by Gary D. Schmidt. Published by Clarion Books, a Houghton
Mifflin Company imprint. Used with permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company via Copyright Clearance Center.
.
“Antarctica’s Hidden Wetland: From Ice to E.T.” by Mary Reina, Muse, January 2016. Copyright © 2016 by Cricket Media. Used with
permission of Carus Publishing Company via Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by Questar Assessment Inc., 5550 Upper 147th
Street West, Minneapolis, MN 55124. Copyright © 2019 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1
Session 1
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some suggestions to help you do your best:
• Be sure to read all the directions carefully.
• Most questions will make sense only when you read the whole passage. You may read
the passage more than once to answer a question. When a question includes a quotation
from a passage, be sure to keep in mind what you learned from reading the whole
passage. You may need to review both the quotation and the passage in order to answer
the question correctly.
• Read each question carefully and think about the answer before making your choice.
Page 1Session 1
is excerpt is based on a true story about a boy named William Kamkwamba who lives in
Malawi, Africa. is region had suffered a long, terrible drought that caused crop failure and
famine.
Excerpt from
Winds of Hope
by Katy Duffield
William hoped that life could now return to normal. He’d worked hard to pass the
exams to enter high school. When the term began, however, William’s father explained
that, because of the drought, there was no money to pay his school fees. It appeared
that William’s education would end at eighth grade.
1
ough he could not attend school, William still wanted to learn. He was curious
about many things. He took apart radios, trying to discover how they made music. One
day, turning a bicycle upside down and cranking the pedals by hand, he figured out that
the dynamo that generated electricity for the headlight could be wired to power a radio
instead. He asked how gasoline made cars run and how CDs stored songs. No one
knew, or even cared much about his questions.
2
Some days, William visited the village library. It had only three shelves, but William
found books that interested him—science books about how things worked. William
would check out
Explaining Physics or
Integrated Science, plop under a mango tree,
and pore over the drawings and diagrams inside. Since his English was not very good,
he oen looked up words in the dictionary or asked the librarian. He wondered if
something in these books might be useful to his family.
3
One day, while looking for a dictionary on the bottom shelf, he found a book he
hadn’t seen before pushed behind the others. It was an American school textbook
called
Using Energy. On the book’s cover was a picture of a row of windmills, tall steel
towers with blades spinning like giant fans. ey reminded William of the toy
pinwheels he’d made with his friends.
4
From this book William learned that wind—something of which Malawi had
plenty—could produce electricity. William was delighted! Only two percent of the
houses in Malawi have electricity. Aer the sun sets, everyone stops what they’re doing,
brushes their teeth, and goes to sleep—at seven in the evening! If William could build a
5
Page 8GO ON
Session 1
Read this article. Then answer questions 8 through 14.
windmill, his family could have lights in their home. And a windmill could be used to
pump water to irrigate the family’s maize fields. If another drought came, the windmill
could provide the water for life.
William could picture in his mind the windmill he wanted to build, but collecting
the parts and tools he needed would take months. In a junkyard across from the high
school, William dug through piles of twisted metal, rusted cars, and worn-out tractors,
searching for anything that might help him construct his machine. He took a ring of
ball bearings from an old peanut grinder and the cooling fan from a tractor engine.
Cracking open a shock absorber, he removed the steel piston inside. He made four-
foot-long blades from plastic pipe, which he melted over a fire, flattened out, and
stiffened with bamboo poles.
6
Earning some money loading logs into a truck, he paid a welder to attach the piston
to the pedal sprocket of an old bicycle frame. is would be the axle of the windmill.
When the wind blew, the rotating blades would turn the bicycle wheel, like someone
pedaling, and spin a small dynamo. Although he had no money for a dynamo, a friend
came to the rescue and bought one from a man in the road, right off his bike.
7
Village kids laughed at William when they saw him scrounging in the scrap yard.
ey called him
misala, which means crazy. But William was too focused on his idea to
care.
8
When he had collected all the parts, William took them out of the corner of his
bedroom, laid them outside in the shade of an acacia tree, and began putting them
together. Since he did not have a drill to make bolt holes, he shoved a nail through a
maize cob, heated it in the fire, then pushed its point through the plastic blades. He
bolted the blades to the tractor fan, using washers he’d made from bottle caps. Next he
pushed the fan onto the piston welded to the bicycle frame. With the help of his two
best friends, William built a 16-foot-tall tower from trunks of blue gum trees and
hoisted the ninety-pound windmill to the top.
9
Shoppers, farmers, and traders could see William’s tower from the local market.
ey came in a long line to find out what the “crazy” boy was up to. “What is it?” they
all asked.
10
Since there is no word for “windmill” in Chichewa, the language of Malawi, William
answered with the phrase
magetsi a mphepo—“electric wind.” From the top of the
tower he explained that, by using the power of wind, his machine could create
electricity. No one believed him.
11
Page 9Session 1
GO ON
William knew this was his moment—his moment to show everyone he wasn’t crazy,
to find out if his experiment would work. He connected two wires from the dynamo to
a light socket he’d made from a reed and that held a small bulb. As the wind whipped
around him, he removed the bent spoke he’d jammed into the wheel to lock it. en he
held his breath. . . .
12
e blades began to turn, slowly at first, then faster and faster. e light bulb
flickered, then flashed to life. e crowd cheered from below. “
Wachitabwina! Well
done!”
13
A month later William found enough wire to reach from the windmill into his
house. His family crowded around to marvel as the small bulb lit up in William’s room.
Reading
Explaining Physics by its light, he stayed up long aer others had gone to bed.
14
In 2006, a school inspector saw the windmill and informed his head office. William’s
machine now powered four lights and two radios in his house. He’d added a storage
battery with homemade switches and a circuit breaker. He also recharged village cell
phones.
15
Soon William was being interviewed on the radio and photographed for the
newspapers. e story of the boy with only an eighth-grade education who’d built
“electric wind” spread across the Internet.
16
Page 10GO ON
Session 1
How do paragraphs 2 and 3 develop a central idea in the article?
A ey state that William was not able to attend school.
B ey show how William learned things on his own.
C ey explain that others did not care about William’s questions.
D ey give examples of the types of books William read.
What does the phrase “pore over” mean as it is used in paragraph 3?
A write about
B glance at
C examine
D copy
Paragraph 6 develops the author’s central claim by showing that William
A was distracted by so many objects in the junkyard
B was resourceful in finding what he needed
C was able to make use of his limited time in school
D was excited to look for new projects
8
9
10
Page 11Session 1
GO ON
Which sentence best describes the relationship between William and the people who doubted
him?
A William was inspired and delighted by them.
B William ignored and then convinced them.
C William was concerned and worried about them.
D William listened to and then got help from them.
In paragraph 14, what does the word “marvel” suggest?
A ey are amazed by what William has done.
B ey are curious to see what will happen to the bulb.
C ey are worried that William’s experiment may be dangerous.
D ey are ready to have more lights in the house.
Which quotation shows an effect of success on William’s life?
A “Shoppers, farmers, and traders could see William’s tower from the local
market.” (paragraph 10)
B “From the top of the tower he explained that, by using the power of wind,
his machine could create electricity.” (paragraph 11)
C “William knew this was his moment—his moment to show everyone he
wasn’t crazy . . .” (paragraph 12)
D “e story of the boy with only an eighth-grade education who’d built
‘electric wind’ spread across the Internet.” (paragraph 16)
11
12
13
Page 12GO ON
Session 1
Based on the information in the article, which of the following is most likely the author’s point
of view?
A Access to formal schooling is important for success.
B Science education is needed to help people flourish.
C Curiosity and persistence can lead to change.
D Families are the best support system.
14
Page 13Session 1
GO ON
e narrator, Holling Hoodhood, has a crush on Meryl Lee Kowalski. Holling’s father has
been honored earlier in the story by a local business group as the best businessman of 1967.
Excerpt from
e Wednesday Wars
by Gary D. Schmidt
e following week the school board met to decide on the model for the new junior
high school—which was probably why Mr. Kowalski had been spending all his time
muttering “classical, classical, classical.” e meeting was to be at four o’clock in the
high school administration building. Mr. Kowalski would present his plan and model,
and then my father would present his plan and model, and then the school board
would meet in private session to decide whether Kowalski and Associates or Hoodhood
and Associates would be the architect for the new junior high school.
1
I know all of this because my father was making me come. It was time I started to
learn the business, he said. I needed to see firsthand how competitive bidding worked. I
needed to experience architectural presentations. I needed to see architecture as the
blood sport that it truly was. . . .
2
e meeting was in the public conference room, and when I got there aer school,
the school board members were all sitting at the head table, studying the folders with
architectural bids. Mr. Kowalski and my father were sitting at two of the high school
desks—which made the whole thing seem a little weirder than it needed to be. In front
of them was a long table with two models for the new junior high school, each one
covered with a white sheet, like they were some sort of national secret. . . .
3
Mr. Kowalski picked up his presentation notes and angled out of his seat. He went
up to the table with the models and stood there for a moment. en he turned and
looked at—no, not my father. At me! . . .
4
Mr. Kowalski cleared his throat. Twice. He looked at his design papers. He cleared
his throat. en he looked back at me once more, and began.
5
“Gentlemen,” he said, “though this is irregular, I have made some significant changes
for the interior of the new junior high since my original submission. In fact the entire
concept has changed markedly. So the plans that you studied for this aernoon’s
presentation have also changed. I have copies of the new interior plan and ask the
6
Page 14GO ON
Session 1
Read this story. Then answer questions 15 through 21.
board’s patience as I show you the concept. is may take slightly longer than the
allotted time, but I’m sure that the Chamber of Commerce Businessman of 1967 won’t
begrudge Kowalski and Associates a few extra minutes in order to clarify the proposal,
and to promote the general business atmosphere of the town.” . . .
What could the Chamber of Commerce Businessman of 1967 do? He shrugged and
nodded. But the back of his neck grew as red as boiling sin, and I knew he
did
begrudge the extra time. He begrudged it a whole lot.
7
Mr. Kowalski pulled the sheet off his model of the junior high school. He cleared his
throat again. “As you can see, gentlemen,” said Mr. Kowalski, “the design is quite
classical, in the best traditions of our national architecture, for a time when our
children desperately need to be reminded of our great American traditions.”
8
And it was. It looked like the Capitol in Washington, D.C. Wide steps swooped up
past a line of pillars and up to the central doors. Above that rose a steep dome, with
thin windows cut all around it. On either side of the dome, the building spread graceful
wings—all with thin windows again—and behind, the long gymnasium formed the tail,
whose rows of bright windows faced south and north to let in as much light as any
gymnasium could ever have.
9
“But we live in 1978, gentlemen,” Mr. Kowalski said. “Just as our children need to be
reminded of our great traditions, so, too, do they need to enjoy the advantages of
contemporary technology. I think you’ll find the new interior design both modern and
innovative, a perfect blend of where we have been and where we are going as a
nation.” He handed out copies of the plans for the new design to all the school board
members, keeping his back to my father and me the whole time. en he took us
through the new interior. Slowly.
10
No pillars, no straight walls. e roof a series of glass plates above the science and art
room. e central dome three stories high over the main lobby and clusters of
classrooms all looking out into the sunlit space. All as modern as could be. . . .
11
e school board was astounded. ree of them applauded—not Mr. Bradbrook,
since God doesn’t applaud.
12
My father turned and looked at me again. His face was very red, and I could tell he
was fighting for some kind of control. “Holling, there’s something you should have told
me, isn’t there?” he whispered slowly. . . .
13
He used the kind of voice that, in my family, means that a voice a whole lot louder is
about to come along in a minute or two, so you’d better start preparing.
14
Page 15Session 1
GO ON
But let me tell you, I didn’t really care all that much about what he would say or how
loudly he would say it. I really didn’t.
15
Because suddenly I knew something a whole lot worse.16
Romeo was a genius compared to me.17
I hadn’t seen at all what Meryl Lee was doing on Valentine’s Day, while we were
sipping sodas at the lunch counter at Woolworth’s. I hadn’t realized how easily she had
gotten what she wanted from me: my father’s design for the new junior high.
18
Page 16GO ON
Session 1
What role do paragraphs 1 through 3 mainly play in the story?
A ey clarify the emotions that the two architects are feeling.
B ey foreshadow the surprise at the ending.
C ey set the scene and explain the process for picking a new design.
D ey set a humorous tone by describing the two architects sitting in school
desks.
In paragraph 6, “markedly” means doing something in
A an obvious way
B a careful way
C a respectful way
D an enthusiastic way
How does the word choice in paragraphs 9 and 11 affect the story?
A It describes how similar the design is to the Capitol building.
B It shows why the design is practical for a school.
C It conveys how impressive Mr. Kowalski’s design is.
D It explains what classical architecture looks like.
15
16
17
Page 17Session 1
GO ON
How do paragraphs 4 and 5 connect to what the reader learns in paragraph 18?
A ey reveal that Mr. Kowalski thinks Holling’s father is a better architect
than he is.
B ey support the idea that Mr. Kowalski is guilty of stealing
Mr. Hoodhood’s plans.
C ey show that Mr. Kowalski hopes Holling likes his plan for the school.
D ey provide information about how Mr. Kowalski’s and Mr. Hoodhood’s
designs are different.
What do paragraphs 15 through 18 reveal about Holling?
A He disobeys his father easily.
B He did not know he was being deceived.
C He is unconcerned with the opinions of others.
D He is a dishonest person.
How does the author develop Holling’s point of view in the story?
A by explaining how his father sees the competition
B by describing Mr. Kowalski’s plans for the school building
C by describing his observations until he realizes what has happened
D by explaining the architectural review process
18
19
20
Page 18GO ON
Session 1
Which detail about Mr. Kowalski and Mr. Hoodhood would be most important to include in a
summary of the story?
A ey have model buildings under sheets on the table.
B ey are competing to design a new school.
C ey must meet with the school board at a school.
D ey have to wait to hear who has been chosen.
21
Page 19Session 1
GO ON
Antarctica’s Hidden Wetland:
From Ice to E.T.
by Mary Reina
A huge lake hides miles below the ice sheet that covers most of Antarctica. at’s big
news for anyone interested in Earth. But scientists who look beyond our planet are
excited too. Astronomers see signs of thick sheets of ice covering large bodies of liquid
water in other places in our solar system.
1
is unseen world on our own planet could help scientists search for life beyond
Earth. is possibility makes Antarctica one of the most valuable environments on
Earth. At least, that’s how scientists view it now.
2
Unlikely in the Extreme
For a long time, most scientists didn’t think liquid water could exist under
Antarctica’s ice cover. Water freezes at 32°F/0°C. A research station called Vostok is
located on top of a thick Antarctic ice sheet. Scientists there once recorded the surface
temperature as –128.6°F/–89°C.
3
In the 1950s, Andrei Kapitsa, a Russian scientist working at Vostok, noticed
something strange. A formation of very flat ice stretched over the research area. He
believed it was a clue suggesting a body of liquid water existed below the ice.
4
en, in the 1970s, planes equipped with more advanced equipment offered new
information. As part of a mapping project, pilots used ground-penetrating radar over
the Vostok station. e data suggested the planes were flying over water. Even then,
scientists did not fully realize that an amazing liquid world was hidden beneath the ice.
Finally, in 1996, satellite technology revealed the shape of a huge subglacial lake.
5
Lake Vostok is about 140 miles (225 kilometers) long. It is about 30 miles
(50 kilometers) wide and the water in the lake reaches as much as 2,625 feet
(800 meters) deep. Such an immense size makes this lake one of the largest in the
world. What had seemed impossible turned out to be true.
6
Page 25Session 1
GO ON
Read this article. Then answer questions 29 through 35.
Signs of Life?
In addition to Lake Vostok, scientists found a huge system of rivers and almost
400 lakes hidden below the Antarctic ice. is could be the largest wetland in the
world, as much as one and a half times the size of the United States.
7
While some scientists mapped out these hidden lakes on Earth, others were
discovering ice-covered environments elsewhere in the solar system. During the 1990s,
the
Galileo spacecra flew by the planet Jupiter and its moons. It sent back photographs
suggesting that an ocean exists below the surface of the ice-covered moon called
Europa.
8
As time went on, more research provided new possibilities. Other moons of Jupiter
and Saturn seemed to be worlds where thick, icy shells surround large bodies of liquid
water.
9
Could life exist in such an extreme environment? It certainly seems unlikely. As with
the discovery of Lake Vostok, the clues for scientists seeking life pointed in “unlikely”
directions. Most life on Earth depends on sunlight. How could sunlight penetrate an ice
cover thousands of feet deep? Living things also depend on nutrients to grow. Where
would these come from? Scientists wondered how nutrients could enter a system that
has been cut off from the world above for millions of years. What’s more, they knew
that any kind of life in this extreme environment would have to survive tons and tons
of pressure from the ice above.
10
Yet, in the deep ocean, some life forms exist without sunlight. eir nutrients come
from the chemicals that rise through the ocean floor from deep inside the Earth. ese
creatures have developed qualities that allow them to thrive under the weight of tons of
water.
11
Could living things with similar abilities exist in Antarctica’s subglacial wetland? If
they do, life might also be possible in the icy moons of the outer solar system.
12
Looking for Proof
First, scientists needed to obtain and test water samples from Antarctica’s hidden
world. It was easier said than done. Antarctica’s extreme cold and short summer season
permits only a few months of research each year. Even then, drilling into the ice posed
another big problem.
13
Page 26GO ON
Session 1
Drilling technology uses chemicals like kerosene and Freon to help melt the ice,
make a borehole, and keep it open. If the drill penetrated the lake, the chemicals could
contaminate the water. is process could also introduce microbes from the surface
into water that had been isolated from the rest of the world for millions of years.
14
Scientists had been drilling into the ice above Lake Vostok long before its discovery.
e ice cores they obtained helped them study a record of Antarctica’s climate going
back hundreds of thousands of years. Ice just above the lake showed signs of
microscopic life. It was a clue but it was not proof.
15
A research team penetrated Lake Vostok in 2012. ey used chemicals to melt the
ice and to keep the borehole open. However, they believed they did not contaminate
the lake because water rushed into the borehole and froze. e team removed the ice
core to study it. However, many other scientists questioned this method.
16
In 2013, Lake Whillans, located in a different area of Antarctica, became the first
subglacial lake where clean technology helped scientists obtain a water sample. Hot
water and ultraviolet light helped sterilize the drills and equipment. Scientists wore
sterile clothing so that they did not contaminate any water samples.
17
ey found almost 4,000 types of microbes not only surviving but also thriving in
Lake Whillans. Some seem to feed on the chemicals found in solid matter, called
sediment, at the bottom of the lake. Others use the dead bodies of other microbes as
food.
18
So far, scientists have found only single-celled microbes living in the few places
where they have tested the subglacial water. More research and testing may help them
discover if larger life forms survive in this extreme environment.
19
Page 27Session 1
GO ON
How does paragraph 3 relate to the other paragraphs in the section “Unlikely in the Extreme”?
A Paragraph 3 introduces a problem, and the other paragraphs explain the
solution to the problem.
B Paragraph 3 explains an idea, and the other paragraphs describe how the
idea was disproved.
C Paragraph 3 presents an argument, and the other paragraphs give evidence
to support the argument.
D Paragraph 3 sets up a comparison, and the other paragraphs give details
about the comparison.
What role does paragraph 8 play in the organization of the article?
A It shows techniques that scientists use to study remote regions.
B It explains how the environment on Jupiter might support life.
C It describes the activities of scientists interested in extreme environments.
D It introduces the connection between activities on Earth and research in
outer space.
How does paragraph 10 develop a central idea in the article?
A It explains how life in an extreme environment could be possible.
B It describes scientific research on the possibility of life in an extreme
environment.
C It provides clues to the possible existence of life in an extreme environment.
D It presents questions to be answered about the possibility of life in an
extreme environment.
29
30
31
Page 28GO ON
Session 1
How did scientists address the concern described in paragraph 14?
A ey removed an ice core from the lake to study it.
B ey applied chemicals to melt ice and keep the borehole open.
C ey obtained a water sample with clean technology.
D ey found sediment at the bottom of the lake.
What is the meaning of the word “contaminate” as used in paragraphs 14 and 16?
A color
B replace
C freeze
D pollute
According to the information in this article, which sentence describes how life was discovered
beneath Antarctica?
A Scientists found proof of water beneath Antarctic ice, then they drilled to
get samples of the water to look for life.
B Scientists saw signs of ice that may cover water on other planets, so they
drilled for water beneath Antarctic ice.
C Scientists knew that there were life forms in the deep parts of the ocean, so
they concluded that there was life in the water beneath Antarctic ice.
D Scientists found microbes on the surface of Antarctic ice, then they drilled
into the ice to look for microbes beneath the surface.
32
33
34
Page 29Session 1
GO ON
Which sentence best shows the author’s point of view on the topic of the article?
A e amount of water below the ice in Antarctica is surprising.
B Astronomers are excited about signs of ice and water on other planets.
C Antarctica is one of the most important scientific environments on Earth.
D e formation of very flat ice at the Vostok station is an important clue.
35
Page 30Session 1
STOP
Grade 7
2019
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
April 2 – 4, 2019
RELEASED QUESTIONS
“At Dusk” from Native Guard by Natasha Trethewey. Copyright © 2006 by Natasha Trethewey. Published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
Publishing Company. Used with permission of Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from “Marine Mammals in Captivity” by The Humane Society of the United States. WEB. Used with permission.
Excerpt from “What Zoo Critics Don’t Understand” by Jack Hanna, Time Magazine, May 15, 2015. Used with permission of Time, Inc. via
Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by Questar Assessment Inc., 5550 Upper 147th
Street West, Minneapolis, MN 55124. Copyright © 2019 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 2
Session 2
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some suggestions to help you do your best:
• Be sure to read all the directions carefully.
• Most questions will make sense only when you read the whole passage. You may read
the passage more than once to answer a question. When a question includes a quotation
from a passage, be sure to keep in mind what you learned from reading the whole
passage. You may need to review both the quotation and the passage in order to answer
the question correctly.
• Read each question carefully and think about the answer before writing your response.
• In writing your responses, be sure to
– clearly organize your writing and express what you have learned;
– accurately and completely answer the questions being asked;
– support your responses with examples or details from the text; and
– write in complete sentences using correct spelling, grammar, capitalization,
and punctuation.
• For the last question in this test book, you may plan your writing on the Planning Page
provided, but do NOT write your final answer on this Planning Page. Writing on this
Planning Page will NOT count toward your final score. Write your final answer on the
lined response pages provided.
Page 1Session 2
5
10
15
20
At Dusk
by Natasha Trethewey
At first I think she is calling a child,
my neighbor, leaning through her doorway
at dusk, street lamps just starting to hum
the backdrop of evening. en I hear
the high-pitched wheedling we send out
to animals who know only sound, not
the meanings of our words—
here here—
nor how they sometimes fall short.
In another yard, beyond my neighbor’s
sight, the cat lis her ears, turns first
toward the voice, then back
to the constellation of fireflies flickering
near her head. It’s as if she can’t decide
whether to leap over the low hedge,
the neat row of flowers, and bound
onto the porch, into the steady circle
of light, or stay where she is: luminous 1
possibility—all that would keep her
away from home—flitting before her.
I listen as my neighbor’s voice trails off.
She’s given up calling for now, le me
to imagine her inside the house waiting,
perhaps in a chair in front of the TV,
or walking around, doing small tasks;
Page 2GO ON
Session 2
Read this poem. Then answer questions 36 through 38.
25 le me to wonder that I too might li
my voice, sure of someone out there,
send it over the lines stitching here
to there, certain the sounds I make
are enough to call someone home.
_______________________
1luminous: filled with light
Page 3Session 2
GO ON
How do the poet’s word choices in lines 1 through 8 of “At Dusk” establish the mood of the
poem? Use two details from the poem to support your response.
36
Page 4GO ON
Session 2
In “At Dusk,” how does the shi that begins in line 21 affect the meaning of the poem? Use two
details from the poem to support your response.
37
Page 5Session 2
GO ON
In “At Dusk,” what do the speaker’s thoughts reveal about her ideas concerning home? Use two
details from the poem to support your response.
38
Page 6GO ON
Session 2
Excerpt from
Marine Mammals
in Captivity
by e Humane Society of the United States
e public display industry captures many species of marine mammals from the
wild, especially whales and dolphins. e Humane Society of the United States believes
that these animals should not be taken from the wild simply to entertain and amuse
people, for a number of reasons.
1
Life in the wild
e very nature of these animals makes them uniquely unsuited to confinement.1 In
the wild, whales and dolphins live in large groups (called pods), oen in tight family
units. Family bonds oen last many years. In some species, they last for a lifetime.
2
Whales and dolphins travel long distances each day, sometimes swimming in a
straight line for a hundred miles, other times remaining in a certain area for hours or
days, moving several miles along a coastline and then turning to retrace their path.
ese marine mammals can dive up to several hundred meters and stay underwater for
up to half an hour. ey spend only 10 to 20% of their time at the surface.
3
e sea is to whales and dolphins much as the air is to birds—a three-dimensional
environment, where they can move up and down and side to side. But whales and
dolphins don’t stop to perch. ey never come to shore, as do seals and sea lions.
Whales and dolphins are always swimming, even when they “sleep.” ey are
“voluntary breathers,” conscious of every breath they take. ey are always aware, and
always moving. Understanding this, it is difficult to imagine the tragedy of life in no
more than a tiny swimming pool.
4
Life in captivity
Life for captive whales and dolphins is nothing like a life in the sea. It is almost
impossible to maintain a family group in captivity. Tanks only allow a few strokes in
any direction before coming to a wall. Because tanks are shallow, the natural tendencies
5
Page 7Session 2
GO ON
Read this excerpt. Then answer questions 39 and 40.
_______________________
1confinement: the state of being closed in or not free
of whales and dolphins are reversed—they spend more than half their time at the
tank’s surface.
is unnatural situation can cause skin problems. In addition, in captive killer
whales (orcas), it is the probable cause of dorsal fin collapse, as without the support of
water, gravity pulls these tall appendages over as the whale matures. Collapsed fins are
experienced by all captive male orcas and many captive female orcas, who were either
captured as juveniles or who were born in captivity. However, they are observed in only
about 1% of orcas in the wild.
6
In a tank, the environment is monotonous and limited in scope. Sonar clicks, the
method by which individuals define their surroundings, have limited utility in such an
environment. ese animals, who are perpetually aware, have nothing like the varied
stimulation of their natural environment. In perpetual motion, they are forced into
literally endless circles. Life for these animals is a mere shadow of what it was in the
wild.
7
Page 8GO ON
Session 2
How does the section “Life in the wild” contribute to the author’s argument in “Excerpt fromMarine Mammals in Captivity”? Use two details from the excerpt to support your response.
39
Page 9Session 2
GO ON
Read this sentence from paragraph 7 of “Excerpt from
Marine Mammals in Captivity.”
Life for these animals is a mere shadow of what it was in the wild.
What does the author mean by this sentence? Use two details from the excerpt to support your
response.
40
Page 10GO ON
Session 2
Dr. Jane Goodall is famous for her work with animals in the wild and her concern for animal
rights. e author of this article, Jack Hanna, is the retired director of the Columbus Zoo.
Excerpt from
What Zoo Critics
Don’t Understand
by Jack Hanna
Dr. Jane Goodall recently made two statements critical of zoos and aquariums. She
said two elephants in a zoo in Seattle should be released to a sanctuary1 and that
SeaWorld should be shut down. Aer the Woodland Park Zoo in Seattle invited her to
learn more about the zoo’s decisions regarding elephants, she took them up on their
invitation. I admire Dr. Goodall for her willingness to learn more and re-evaluate her
initial comments. I hope Dr. Goodall will also engage in a conversation with SeaWorld
about her concerns. . . .
1
Critics say the only place animals belong is in the wild, but those boundaries are
shrinking each day. Having traveled the world, the only places I consider truly “wild”
are Antarctica, parts of the Amazon and some places in Africa. Even in Africa, the
“wild” places tend to be national parks with guarded boundaries. Animals face many
challenges, including habitat loss, poaching, 2 severe weather, and war. e “wild” is not
necessarily the idyllic place people imagine. Poaching has decimated the northern
white rhino population—the last known male has his own personal 24-hour security to
ensure he isn’t poached for his horn. . . .
2
I can tell you firsthand that the animals in SeaWorld’s parks receive world-class care.
eir zoological team shares my commitment to protecting and preserving species;
educating young people about the risks that animals face in the natural world; and
inspiring the next generation of conservationists, marine biologists, scientists, and
animal enthusiasts. e animal care teams at SeaWorld understand the value of
studying animals in zoological settings in order to save future generations.
3
Furthermore, this spring I witnessed SeaWorld’s rescue teams in full swing. More
than 25,000 animals owe their lives to SeaWorld animal rescue teams. Just this year,
they have saved more than 500 sea lions on the West Coast. e SeaWorld team has
4
Page 11Session 2
GO ON
Read this excerpt. Then answer questions 41 through 43.
_______________________
1sanctuary: a protected place for animals
2poaching: to hunt or take animals illegally
worked around the clock to rehabilitate these animals, all with the goal of returning
them to the wild. e team at SeaWorld San Diego even built two new pools to
accommodate them, and closed its Sea Lion and Otter Show so that its staff could
dedicate more time to nursing the pups back to health.
Page 12GO ON
Session 2
In “Excerpt from
What Zoo Critics Don’t Understand,” how does Jack Hanna distinguish his
position about animals in captivity from Dr. Jane Goodall’s position about animals in captivity?
Use two details from the excerpt to support your response.
41
Page 13Session 2
GO ON
What is a central idea in “Excerpt from
What Zoo Critics Don’t Understand”? Use two details
from the excerpt to support your response.
42
Page 14GO ON
Session 2
Page 15Session 2
GO ON
DO NOT WRITE
THIS PAGE PURPOSELY
LEFT BLANK

In “Excerpt from
Marine Mammals in Captivity” and “Excerpt from
What Zoo Critics Don’t
Understand,” the authors present arguments about whether or not animals should be kept in
captivity. What claims does each author make? What evidence do the authors use to support
their claims? Which author’s argument is more convincing? Use details from both excerpts to
support your response.
In your response, be sure to
identify the claims that each author makes
identify the evidence that the authors use to support their claims
explain which author’s argument is more convincing
use details from both excerpts to support your response
43
Page 17Session 2
GO ON
Page 18Session 2
S
T
O
P
Grade 7
2019
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
April 2 – 4, 2019
Multiple Choice Questions: Constructed Response Questions:
Percentage of Students
Who Answered Correctly
(P-Value)
Average
Points
Earned
P-Value
(Average Points Earned
÷ Total Possible Points)
8 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.2 Reading 0.81
9 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.7.4 Reading 0.67
10 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.5 Reading 0.81
11 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.3 Reading 0.83
12 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.4 Reading 0.74
13 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.3 Reading 0.77
14 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.6 Reading 0.79
15 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.5 Reading 0.59
16 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.7.4 Reading 0.48
17 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.4 Reading 0.38
18 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.3 Reading 0.53
19 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.3 Reading 0.57
20 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.6 Reading 0.64
21 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.2 Reading 0.79
29 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.5 Reading 0.34
30 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.5 Reading 0.48
31 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.2 Reading 0.42
32 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.3 Reading 0.23
33 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.4 Reading 0.77
34 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.3 Reading 0.48
35 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.6 Reading 0.51
36 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.4 Writing to Sources 1.52 0.76
37 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.5 Writing to Sources 1.43 0.71
38 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.6 Writing to Sources 1.22 0.61
SubscoreStandardPointsKeyTypeQuestion
Session 2
Session 1
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2019 English Language Arts Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 7 Released Questions on EngageNY
39 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.5 Writing to Sources 1.56 0.78
40 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.4 Writing to Sources 1.49 0.75
41 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.6 Writing to Sources 1.33 0.66
42 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.2 Writing to Sources 1.42 0.71
43 Constructed Response 4 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.8 Writing to Sources 2.43 0.61
*This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question on the 2019 operational ELA test. However, each constructed-response
question measures proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards. For example, two-point and four-point constructed-
response questions require students to first conduct the analyses described in the mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on writing standards. To
gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please refer to the rubrics shown in the Educator Guides.