Copyright © 2019, Texas Education Agency. All rights reserved. Reproduction of all or portions of this work is prohibited without express
written permission from the Texas Education Agency.
State of Texas
Assessments of
Academic Readiness
STAAR®
GRADE 8
Reading
Administered April 2019
RELEASEDSTAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
READING
Reading
Page 3STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Read the selection and choose the best answer to each question. Then fill in
the answer on your answer document.
A Rite of Passage (and the
Importance of Penguin Etiquette)
by Chris Epting
1 There’s a common expression, “No pain, no gain,” which means that
achievement requires some sort of sacrifice—mental sacrifice, physical
sacrifice—something. Little did I know how important that phrase would soon
become in my life, all because of an invitation to witness, up close and personal,
some of the most fascinating (and loveable) animals on this planet.
2 When my fourteen-year-old daughter, Claire, and I found out that we were
going to Antarctica to visit with and study the emperor penguins, we were
thrilled. We had entered and won an essay contest. The grand prize promised an
almost unfathomable adventure: three weeks living aboard a Russian icebreaker
ship near an icy, remote outpost called Snow Hill Island.
3 Getting to Antarctica is no small feat. It is
extremely difficult to fly there, as the official
population is zero. The few who are lucky
enough to visit this most mysterious continent
do so by ships.
4 This is where the “pain” comes in. You
see, to reach Antarctica, ships must pass
through a notoriously violent area of ocean
called the Drake Passage, considered to be the
roughest stretch of sea on the planet.
5 Walls of water thirty, sometimes forty feet
high—tremendous towers of dark green, icy
waves—continually crashed about our ship for
two solid days. We would hold on to a railing inside the ship while being violently
tilted to one extreme side, then to the other, and then back again. Over and
over and over, nonstop. If not for the belt straps on our cabin bed, we would
have flown up in the air as we tried to sleep.
6 My daughter and I knew about the Drake Passage and were as mentally
prepared as we could be. We knew what waited at the end of the journey—the
penguins—and so together we convinced ourselves it was all worth the pain. But
as mentally prepared as we were, we also had to be physically aware, as well. It
was important to always watch our footing as we crept to the dining room each
day to carefully grab a quick meal before returning to our cabin to ride out the
sickening, never-ending storm.
7 I started to wonder, “Is this worth it? Will the gain be worth all of this
struggle?”
EW
N
S
D
r
a
k
e
P
assa
g
e
South
America
Pacific
Ocean
Atlantic
Ocean
Antarctica
Reading
Page 4STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
8 Then, about two and a half days after entering the Drake Passage, the
waters calmed. For the first time on our journey, we walked out on deck and felt
the sweet bite of the cold, clean air on our faces.
9 Soon, we noticed small black specks on nearby pieces of floating ice.
Emperor penguins! The closer our ship got, the more it seemed as if the animals
were welcoming us—some of them actually beating their wings together, as if
they were applauding our arrival.
10 Before long, we reached our final destination, and we were allowed to take
our first ice walk. Across the crunchy surface, we could see hundreds of
penguins in the distance, watching us as we watched them.
11 As we learned on board, their interest was to be expected. Penguins are
extremely curious and not fearful of humans.
12 The next day, two helicopters that would take us from our ship to the base
camp were assembled on the deck of the ship.
13 After landing, we were given instructions on “penguin etiquette.” These
were the basic rules: You can’t touch a penguin, but they can touch you if they’d
like. You can’t crowd them, but they can crowd you if they so desire. And you
always give them the right of way. Beyond those rules, we were free to explore,
photograph, and observe to our heart’s content.
14 We began the two-mile hike over the ice to the penguin colony.
15 Within several hundred yards, little clusters of emperors, perhaps ten or so
at a time, greeted us, sliding on their bellies and making their wonderful noises,
sort of a nasally squeal. But the real treat still awaited: the colony.
16 As far as we could see, there were emperor penguins—tens of thousands of
them, stretched out to the horizon line. It was breathtaking. Thousands of newly
hatched chicks waddled among the adults, vying for attention.
Reading
Page 5STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
A Colony of Emperor Penguins
at Snow Hill Island
Jonathan & Angela Scott/Getty Images
17 We found a quiet piece of ice, sat down, and within minutes were
surrounded by dozens of curious emperors. In some cases, their beaks were just
inches from our noses.
18 One day, two adult emperors with their three chicks in tow approached
Claire, who was resting on the ice. They left the chicks with her, as if she were
the babysitter. Twenty minutes later they returned to collect the chicks. And I
will never forget the penguin that, when I jokingly asked which way back to the
helicopters, pointed a wing in the correct direction.
Emperor Penguin Chicks
Frank Krahmer
19 Every night aboard our safe and warm ship, we thought about what it takes
to survive in Antarctica, an incredibly harsh place.
20 But each day on the ice, we also thought about the Drake passage, that
monstrous body of water we had to endure to get where we were. Over the
course of our visit, we came to respect and even revere the power of that sea.
Reading
Page 6STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Reading
Page 7
22 No pain, no gain.
21 We still talk about the penguins, as I’m sure we always will. But we talk
about the Drake too. Both experiences were unforgettable, and one would not
have been possible without the other.
From Breakfast on Mars and 37 Other Delectable Essays: Your Favorite Authors Take a Stab at the Dreaded Essay
Assignment © 2013 edited by Rebecca Stern and Brad Wolfe. Reprinted by permission of Roaring Brook Press, a division
of Holtzbrinck Publishing Holdings Limited Partnership. All rights reserved.STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
1 When describing the penguins, the author mostly focuses on their —
A concern for their baby chicks
B friendly and entertaining behavior
C ability to survive in their environment
D dependence on one another
2 In paragraph 4, what does the word notoriously mean?
F Frequently traveled
G Hard to locate
H Recognized in a negative way
J Viewed from a distance
3 Which sentence from the selection best conveys the author’s main message?
A But as mentally prepared as we were, we also had to be physically aware, as well.
(paragraph 6)
B Every night aboard our safe and warm ship, we thought about what it takes to survive in
Antarctica, an incredibly harsh place. (paragraph 19)
C Over the course of our visit, we came to respect and even revere the power of that sea.
(paragraph 20)
D Both experiences were unforgettable, and one would not have been possible without the
other. (paragraph 21)
Reading
Page 8STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
4 The organizers of the expedition created “penguin etiquette” most likely to —
F limit the interaction between the penguins and the visitors
G minimize possible negative effects of visitors on the penguin habitat
H create awareness among the visitors about the challenges penguins face
J boost visitors’ chances of observing tens of thousands of penguins each day
5 Based on the selection, what did the author most likely gain from his experience?
A An understanding of how animals survive in cold climates
B An interest in other journeys that involve physical challenges
C An awareness of the types of activities his daughter enjoys
D An increased respect for the power of nature
6 What is the best summary of this selection?
F When the author and his daughter win a trip to Antarctica, they board an icebreaker ship
and travel through an area called the Drake Passage. During their time in Antarctica, they
observe a penguin colony made up of tens of thousands of penguins. They must adhere to
certain rules while they are there.
G Getting to Antarctica requires people to travel by ship through a rough area of the sea.
After winning a trip to Antarctica to observe penguins, the author and his daughter make
this difficult voyage. Once they arrive, they see thousands of penguins up close and know
the trip was worth the suffering.
H The author and his daughter take a trip to Antarctica, where they have an opportunity to
observe penguin behavior up close. They take photographs of the large penguin colony.
Long after the trip, they still talk about the experience.
J After winning a contest, the author and his daughter travel to Antarctica and see
penguins. Since there are no airports in Antarctica, they have to sail there through rough
water. Once they arrive, they must take a helicopter from their ship over to the penguin
colony.
Reading
Page 9STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
7 Which sentence from the selection best expresses the author’s enthusiasm during his
observation of the penguins?
A Across the crunchy surface, we could see hundreds of penguins in the distance, watching
us as we watched them. (paragraph 10)
B Penguins are extremely curious and not fearful of humans. (paragraph 11)
C We began the two-mile hike over the ice to the penguin colony. (paragraph 14)
D And I will never forget the penguin that, when I jokingly asked which way back to the
helicopters, pointed a wing in the correct direction. (paragraph 18)
8 Read this sentence from paragraph 8.
For the first time on our journey, we walked
out on deck and felt the sweet bite of the cold,
clean air on our faces.
The sensory language in this sentence best reveals the author’s —
F sense of relief and accomplishment at having arrived in Antarctica
G understanding of the extreme weather conditions in Antarctica
H frustration at having been kept in his cabin for most of the voyage
J feeling of anticipation to soon be interacting with the penguins
Reading
Page 10STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Read the next two selections. Then choose the best answer to each
question.
Persevering Plants
1 Yellowstone National Park extends across a
unique area of land in Wyoming, Montana, and
Idaho. Thousands of geothermal vents that lie
just below the earth’s surface cover this vast
region. Geothermal vents are deep holes in the
ground that release built-up pressure in the
form of steam and scalding-hot water. The
temperature of the ground near these hot
spots can rise to more than 150 degrees
Fahrenheit. During a trip to Yellowstone,
microbiologist Rusty Rodriguez noticed
something peculiar. He observed many plants
thriving in the searing soil despite these
intense conditions. Rodriguez wondered how
these plants were able to flourish in such
extreme temperatures while other plants in
similar or milder environments perish.
2 To solve this mystery Rodriguez took plant
samples back to his laboratory for
investigation. Under a microscope he saw tiny
strands of fungi called endophytes living on the
plants. Rodriguez’s research revealed that the
endophytes made the plants better able to handle climate stressors such as
drought, heat, and cold. Correspondingly, the plant provided sugar to support
the existence of the fungi.
3 About 80 percent of the earth’s plants have a strain of endophyte fungus living
on them. However, in the last few decades the fungi have unintentionally been
destroyed by pesticides and fertilizer. Rodriguez believed that if the fungi could
somehow be added back to a plant, its natural protection could be restored.
4 Rodriguez extracted endophyte fungi from several native plants known for
surviving extreme temperatures to create a mixture. He found that when the
mixture is applied to seeds, plants become immune to many of the agricultural
woes that plague farmers. When plants are restored with endophyte fungi, they
are protected from heat or cold. They also require less water and fertilizer to
grow. Overall, plants are much healthier and more resilient.
A Geothermal Vent at
Yellowstone National Park
© iStock.com/SBTheGreenMan
Reading
Page 11STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Both of these soy plants experienced six days
of drought conditions, but the one on the right
was treated with Rodriguez’s endophyte mixture.
Used with permission.
5 Rodriguez has tested his endophyte mixture on crops and achieved success. In
2012 the state of Michigan was experiencing severe drought and extreme
temperatures. Corn and rice seeds were coated with Rodriguez’s creation to see
how they would endure such conditions. The results were overwhelmingly
optimistic. Crop yields increased by 85 percent. In addition, the plants used
between 25 and 50 percent less water than those not treated. Simply put,
plants that had the mixture added to them were more inclined to tolerate
drought than others.
6 Scientists are hopeful about the potential of endophyte fungi. Plants are easily
protected from drought and other severe conditions when they are treated with
this fungus. It is also a natural, nontoxic substance that does not harm plants or
humans. Endophyte fungi could quite possibly be the key to providing
sustainable crops for the future.
Third party trademark Yellowstone® was used in these testing materials.
Reading
Page 12STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
In this issue: The Cure for Concrete September 2015
Smart Discoveries in Science
The Cure for Concrete
1 Bacteria have a reputation for being harmful. However, not all bacteria are bad.
Some food products, such as yogurt, contain good bacteria. The human body
even stores bacteria that help us produce vitamins and fight diseases.
2 Dutch microbiologist Hendrik Jonkers studies bacteria. He also has researched
how certain living organisms are able to heal themselves when injured. An
octopus, for example, can grow a new arm if needed. When a bone breaks in
the human body, it is able to repair itself. Jonkers wondered if bacteria could be
used to “heal” nonliving substances in a similar way. He tested this theory by
adding bacteria to concrete. He discovered that concrete may also be able to
recuperate from damage.
3 Concrete is one of the most important building materials. It was even used by
the ancient Romans to build massive structures such as the Colosseum. Today it
is used to construct highways, bridges, and high-rise buildings. In fact, concrete
demand has doubled in the last decade. Concrete production now accounts for
5% of the world’s carbon emissions, which is harmful to the environment.
The Colosseum in Rome, Italy, is
almost 2,000 years old.
© Nataliya Hora/Dreamstime.com
4 Despite its popularity, concrete cracks. When water gets inside the cracks, it
weakens the composition of the concrete. Eventually the concrete must be
repaired or replaced. In Europe the annual cost of maintaining concrete
structures is billions of dollars.
Reading
Page 13STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
5 Jonkers has developed a self-healing concrete, or bioconcrete, to help solve
these problems. He combines concrete with bacteria that are naturally able to
produce limestone, a hard rock. The bacteria are placed inside plastic capsules
that are mixed into wet concrete. The bacteria can live in the hardened concrete
for decades. When water enters through cracks in the concrete, the plastic
capsules open, and the bacteria are released. As the bacteria grow and multiply,
they form limestone, which fills in the cracks.
Hendrik Jonkers with a Slab of Bioconcrete
Delft University of Technology
6 In 2011 self-healing concrete was used to construct a lifeguard station near a
lake in the Netherlands. Lifeguard stations are susceptible to damage by water
and weather. With the help of Jonkers’ bioconcrete, the lifeguard station has
remained intact. Bioconcrete has been used on the floors and roofs of parking
garages. It has even been used to reconstruct a canal and irrigation system in
Ecuador.
7 While bioconcrete has its advantages, it is 50 percent more costly to create than
traditional concrete. This makes the product unappealing to some people in the
construction industry. Still, Jonkers believes the initial investment is worth the
long-term savings and advantages it will provide.
8 Bioconcrete will reduce the need for repairs and making new concrete. In return,
this will help manufacturers save money over time, and it will help lessen the
amount of carbon pollution. Jonkers says, “I think it’s a really nice example of
tying nature and the built environments together in one new concept.”
Reading
Page 14STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Use “Persevering Plants” (pp. 11–12) to answer questions 9–13. Then fill
in the answers on your answer document.
9 Which characteristic of the geothermal vents made the survival of nearby plants so
surprising?
A The depth of the holes
B The heat they generate
C The number of them that exist
D The amount of pressure they release
10 How do the photograph and caption after paragraph 4 help the reader better understand the
selection?
F They explain how endophytes work to help plants.
G They demonstrate the effect endophytes can have on plants.
H They illustrate what kinds of plants endophytes can help.
J They show the conditions against which endophytes can protect plants.
11 How are paragraphs 2 through 4 organized?
A They compare the plants Rodriguez collected to the endophytes living on the plants.
B They describe the steps Rodriguez followed while researching plants in his laboratory.
C They explain the problem Rodriguez was trying to solve based on his observations.
D They describe the structure of the plants Rodriguez collected from a harsh environment.
Reading
Page 15STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
12 What is paragraph 1 mostly about?
F The unusual conditions in which some plants can survive
G The occurrence of geothermal vents in several western states
H The way geothermal vents release pressure in the form of steam
J The types of plants that microbiologists have observed at a national park
13 An idea emphasized throughout the selection is that Rodriguez’s endophyte solution —
A can improve plant life in national parks
B eliminates the need to water plants regularly
C will allow farmers to plant crops regardless of the season
D can restore a plant’s natural resistance to the effects of a harsh climate
Reading
Page 16STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Use “The Cure for Concrete” (pp. 13–14) to answer questions 14–18. Then
fill in the answers on your answer document.
14 Which statement best expresses the main idea of paragraph 3?
F Modern highways and bridges are often constructed with concrete.
G Concrete was used by ancient Romans to build massive structures.
H The demand for concrete has doubled in the last decade.
J Concrete has been and continues to be an important building material.
15 The information in paragraph 6 helps the reader understand that bioconcrete —
A works best in areas affected by harsh weather conditions
B is effective in repairing water damage
C has a maximum weight that it can support
D is limited to use in certain parts of the world
16 How does the author organize paragraph 1?
F By listing types of bacteria and then telling how they help fight diseases in the
human body
G By defining bacteria and then explaining how bacteria are used in some products
H By stating a popular belief about bacteria and then disproving it with examples
J By comparing good and bad bacteria and then describing how bacteria work
Reading
Page 17STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
17 What is the best summary of the article?
A Concrete is a popular material, but it can develop cracks over time. Microbiologist Hendrik
Jonkers believes that adding bacteria to concrete can help remedy this problem and
provide savings for the construction industry.
B Hendrik Jonkers, a Dutch microbiologist, noticed that concrete cracks over time. He
decided to add bacteria to concrete to make a substance called bioconcrete. The bacteria
are placed inside plastic capsules that are mixed into wet concrete.
C A Dutch microbiologist named Hendrik Jonkers became interested in investigating how
bacteria might be applied to concrete to fill cracks in concrete caused by water. He
developed a self-healing bioconcrete that works to make concrete more durable.
D Microbiologist Hendrik Jonkers wondered if concrete could repair itself in the same way
that human bones do. He developed bioconcrete, which was used to build a lifeguard
station near a lake in the Netherlands and repair an irrigation system in Ecuador.
18 Read this sentence from paragraph 2.
When a bone breaks in the human body, it is
able to repair itself.
What is the most likely reason the author includes this information?
F To advocate for more research concerning skeletal injuries
G To suggest that bacteria could improve people’s health
H To show the need for Jonkers’ research
J To provide an example of the goal of Jonkers’ research
Reading
Page 18STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Use “Persevering Plants” and “The Cure for Concrete” to answer
questions 19–22. Then fill in the answers on your answer document.
19 What is one way that Rodriguez’s and Jonkers’ methods were similar?
A They both created mixtures using living materials.
B They both traveled to an unfamiliar location to begin their research.
C They both studied particular animals to inform their research.
D They both considered how temperature might affect their results.
20 Read this sentence from paragraph 5 of “Persevering Plants.”
Rodriguez has tested his endophyte mixture on
crops and achieved success.
Which sentence from “The Cure for Concrete” shows a similar outcome for bioconcrete?
F The bacteria can live in the hardened concrete for decades. (paragraph 5)
G In 2011 self-healing concrete was used to construct a lifeguard station near a lake in the
Netherlands. (paragraph 6)
H With the help of Jonkers’ bioconcrete, the lifeguard station has remained intact.
(paragraph 6)
J Bioconcrete has been used on the floors and roofs of parking garages. (paragraph 6)
Reading
Page 19STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
21 What is one problem presented about bioconcrete that is not presented about endophyte
fungi?
A Bioconcrete is expensive to produce.
B Bioconcrete may be unintentionally destroyed.
C Bioconcrete contains harmful bacteria.
D Bioconcrete is exposed to weather conditions.
22 What is one difference between Rodriguez’s endophyte mixture and the bacteria in Jonkers’
products?
F The endophyte mixture is clearly visible on seeds.
However, the bacteria in the concrete cannot be detected.
G The endophyte mixture covers the outside of seeds.
However, the bacteria are placed inside the concrete.
H The endophyte mixture is not a substance found naturally in plants.
However, the bacteria is a natural part of concrete.
J The endophyte mixture remains inactive for a period of time.
However, the bacteria begin to work immediately.
Reading
Page 20STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Read the selection and choose the best answer to each question. Then fill in
the answer on your answer document.
invitation
by Mackenzie Connellee
used to write poetry in art class
when the teacher wasn’t looking,
but now i don’t take art and i can’t
afford not to pay attention in my
5 classes. now i write poetry in my
free time but that’s difficult
because words don’t appear like
a dog when you call their name, no,
poetry is anything but convenient.
10 right now it’s 1:05 A.M. because poetry
shook me by the shoulders and said
hey, this is important but now i’m wondering
if the lack of sleep is worth it. i feel
i am always weighing time by the quality
15 of poems written, because even when
the words grace me with their presence,
they don’t always choose to step
delicately into the world, pink shoes
treading softly over the white horizon.
20 usually poetry slops lazily over the couch
of a page and dangles while i remove its muddy
shoes and rearrange the pillows, all the while
muttering something about Frost and how maybe
his comments against free verse were right
25 all along (poetry in rhyme always cleans up
after itself) although honestly, you haven’t lived
until the homeless free-verse poem on your couch
decides to stay for a cup of tea and, if you’re
lucky, lets you take notes on everything he says.
Courtesy of Mackenzie Connellee
Reading
Page 21STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
23 Which of these ideas is emphasized by the simile in lines 7 and 8?
A Poetry can appear in many different forms.
B New poems can be valued like a companion.
C New poems do not come to mind right away.
D Poetry writing is not as enjoyable as having a pet.
24 Read the dictionary entry.
afford \ə-ˈf˙ord\ v
1. to bear the financial cost of 2. to
be able to spare or give up 3. to
provide for another 4. to be the
cause or source of
Which definition best matches the way the word afford is used in line 4?
F Definition 1
G Definition 2
H Definition 3
J Definition 4
25 What process is the poet describing when she uses the words “i remove its muddy shoes and
rearrange the pillows” in lines 21 and 22?
A Finding a topic to write about
B Writing from personal experience
C Revising a poem’s ideas and words
D Sharing a poem with an audience
Reading
Page 22STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
26 The title of the poem is effective because it suggests that the speaker —
F desires more poetry to come into her life
G tries to schedule time for writing poetry
H longs for poetry assignments at school
J wants people to enjoy reading her poetry
27 What do the contrasting images in lines 17 through 22 suggest?
A Writing poetry can be relaxing.
B Poets are sensitive by nature.
C Writing poetry is often not easy.
D Poets have active imaginations.
28 The poet uses lines 1 through 6 to establish that —
F art and poetry share many similarities
G the speaker hopes to keep her poetry a secret
H poetry is an important subject to learn in school
J the speaker wishes she had more time to write poetry
Reading
Page 23STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Read the selection and choose the best answer to each question. Then fill in
the answer on your answer document.
What Can We See in a Logo?
1 The typical person is bombarded by hundreds of logos each day. We see them
on signs, vehicles, television, and even on the clothes we wear. Logos are
distinct images used to represent brands. There are logos such as the famous
Nike “swoosh,” the colorful rings to identify the Olympic Games, and the United
States Postal Service eagle emblem, just to name a few. All of these logos are
designed to attract our attention. They also help us remember a product or
service connected to that image. However, research conducted at the University
of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) supports the idea that remembering what a
logo looks like is a very difficult task.
2 In 2015 researchers at UCLA gave 85 students a
simple assignment. They had to draw the Apple logo
purely from memory. Most of the students were
Apple users, so they had the opportunity to look at
the logo every day. Surprisingly, only one student in
the study could accurately draw the logo from
memory. Many of the sketches the other students
made were flawed. Some of them drew the basics
right but missed minor details of the design—no bite
out of the apple or the wrong number of leaves. At
first the researchers thought the problem might be
that the students were just not very good at drawing.
They decided to ask the students to look at several different images and choose
the logo that was most accurate. Less than half of the students could detect the
correct image.
3 The UCLA Apple study is not the first time our ability to remember the details of
images has been tested. In the 1970s researchers asked a group of people to
draw a penny from memory. Participants were instructed to show the images
and words just as they appear on the coin. Like the Apple study, most people
could not precisely depict the image. Participants were unable to correctly
identify which way Lincoln was facing or where the word “Liberty” was placed on
the coin. While the penny is not technically a logo, it is an object with which
people have frequent interaction. So why is it so difficult for people to recall the
details of images, such as logos, that they see every day? Researchers have
developed a theory they think might help to explain this blind spot in our
memories.
© Subhra2jyoti/Dreamstime.com
The Apple Logo
Reading
Page 24STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Two Sides of a Penny
© Kevin Grant/Dreamstime.com
4 Logos are typically designed to be simple and easy to recognize with a quick
glance. Yet the frequent exposure to these logos can actually make our brains
overlook them. This process is known as “attentional saturation.” It would be
challenging to try to remember every single thing that crosses our path. We
take in so much information every day that the brain works to spot information
that does not need to be stored. It allows this unimportant information to fade
from our memory. Our brains actually signal us to ignore information we do not
think we will need to remember.
5 The details of product logos are just the kind of information our brains tell us we
do not need. This may be discouraging to logo designers and to companies that
use these eye-catching logos. But there are still many business experts who
believe in the importance of a recognizable logo.
6 Even though the brain is accustomed to ignoring unnecessary details, it is also
programmed for recognition. When we see images such as logos over and over
again, we become familiar with them. This constant exposure leads to
something scientists refer to as gist memory. “Gist memory” means that our
brain remembers the basic idea without all of the details. This general sense of
memory has its own benefits. When we see that “swoosh” or the apple with a
bite out of it, we are acquainted with the image. We may not be able to draw a
perfect outline of the logo, but we are able to recognize the image. When people
are able to recognize an image, it can make them feel like they really know the
product behind the logo. In fact, familiarity with a prevalent logo can even make
people feel more comfortable about purchasing or using certain products.
7 Logos are everywhere we look today. A fancy design or a thoughtful color
combination may be a good start for a logo concept, but there are other factors
to consider. Those establishing a logo need to know that people will only
remember what they believe is worthwhile. A clever design may be interesting,
but most people will forget the details—especially if our brains have anything to
say about it.
Third party trademarks Nike®, swoosh®, Olympic®, United States Postal Service®, University of California Los
Angeles®, UCLA® and Apple® were used in these testing materials.
Reading
Page 25STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
29 “Gist memory” occurs when the brain —
A recalls specific details
B remembers a general idea
C connects information
D overlooks common images
30 In paragraph 6, the word prevalent means —
F elaborate
G creative
H vital
J widespread
31 What example of “attentional saturation” does the author provide in the selection?
A Companies use memorable logos to represent their brands.
B Participants in a study could not recall details of images seen every day.
C Business experts believe that product logos are important.
D Researchers gave students a simple assignment to complete.
Reading
Page 26STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
32 Which sentence from the selection suggests that companies may want to reconsider their
approach to branding their products?
F We see them on signs, vehicles, television, and even on the clothes we wear.
(paragraph 1)
G Researchers have developed a theory they think might help to explain this blind spot in
our memories. (paragraph 3)
H The details of product logos are just the kind of information our brains tell us we do not
need. (paragraph 5)
J But there are still many business experts who believe in the importance of a recognizable
logo. (paragraph 5)
33 The author mentions common name brands in the first paragraph most likely to —
A create a connection with the reader
B define key terms for the reader
C offer an opinion to the reader about the topic
D introduce the reader to the main idea of the selection
34 What is paragraph 2 mainly about?
F The skill it takes to identify a logo from several images
G The popularity of a certain technology brand
H The poor drawing ability of students
J The results of a research study
Reading
Page 27STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
35 How does the author organize the selection?
A By describing how logos are problematic and then offering solutions on how to improve
them
B By presenting research about logos and then explaining how logos are perceived by the
brain
C By listing familiar logos and then showing how those logos are influential in advertising
D By comparing common objects to logos and then contrasting the theories about logos
36 According to paragraph 6, people are more likely to buy a product when they —
F notice a clever design and feel curious about the product
G see a colorful label and are drawn to reading its information
H recognize an image and feel like they know the product well
J glance quickly at a brand and are attracted by the packaging
Reading
Page 28STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Read the selection and choose the best answer to each question. Then fill in
the answer on your answer document.
The Lesson in Design
1 It was Friday afternoon, and another week of school was finally over. Andy
weaved his way through the crowded hall, trying to avoid colliding with students
at their lockers getting books and backpacks. He walked out the nearest exit
and headed for the student parking lot, where he would wait for his best friend
Broden.
2 While Andy waited at Broden’s car, he studied the fabrics and colors of the other
students’ clothes. Everyone wore the same basic outfit—jeans and some sort of
shirt. Nothing out of the ordinary, nothing flashy or stylish. Being from a family
of tailors, Andy had learned a lot about clothing over the years—how to make it
and how to alter it. But Andy wanted to be more than just a tailor.
3 Broden dropped Andy off at his father’s tailor shop. Andy watched his
father—pins in his mouth, measuring tape draped around his neck—expertly
hem and repair Mr. Simone’s pants.
4 Mr. Simone paid his bill and then carefully, almost proudly, placed the newly
perfected pants over his arm. Andy thought he detected a spring in Mr. Simone’s
step as he left the shop. Andy watched Mr. Simone as he laid the pants on the
backseat of his car, smoothing them so that they wouldn’t wrinkle. There was no
denying that tailoring was a valuable service to some. But to Andy his family’s
business seemed like a whole lot of tedious busywork: hemming pants,
shortening the length of sleeves, taking in or letting out a waistline, replacing
buttons, hooks, or snaps.
5 Andy’s father peered over his eyeglasses, studying Andy as Andy observed
Mr. Simone. “Often, when people look better, they act better too. When people
know they look good, they are more comfortable, less worried,” Andy’s father
explained.
6 Andy knew that his father had a point. That was exactly the reason Andy longed
to create something of his own. Something different. Something exceptional.
7 “Well that’s it for today,” said Andy’s father, flipping the sign on the door to the
CLOSED side and letting out a tired but satisfied sigh in response to a long
workday. “There’s something I want to give you, Andy,” he said as he beckoned
for Andy to follow him to the back room. On the corner of a large worktable sat
a bulky antique sewing machine, a retro model that looked very different from
the modern one Andy’s father used. “I was your age when my father gave this
to me, and now I’m giving it to you.”
8 Andy eyed the old machine appreciatively. “Thank you, Dad. This is perfect!”
9 Andy wanted to use the sewing machine right away, but first he needed to draw
his clothing design. He needed a design that was stylish yet original. Fortunately
he wasn’t starting with a blank page. Andy had been sketching designs as long
Reading
Page 29STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
as he could remember. Sometimes he drew in Ms. Greene’s art class; sometimes
he drew during lunch. Mostly he drew during the free minutes of his day, when
he could empty his mind and just trust his charcoal pencil.
10 A visit to the fabric store that weekend turned into an expedition as he hunted
down the perfect textiles for his creation. “Your father doing something special?”
asked the owner.
11 “It’s for a school project,” Andy replied. It wasn’t exactly a lie. On his way back
home, he looked at what people were wearing, the parade of pants, shirts,
dresses, jeans, and ordinariness.
12 Andy began working that same night, losing himself in lines and folds, ripping
out stitches and redoing them. It took over a week, but after multiple fittings
and adjustments, his outfit was ready for its debut.
13 On Monday morning, Andy walked into school anticipating the glowing
admiration of his fellow students. As he walked down the hall, heads turned.
Teachers moved aside, guys pointed at him, and girls covered their mouths to
hide their laughter.
14 Even Broden looked at him sympathetically. “Was this a dare or something?” he
whispered to Andy at their lockers.
15 A morning full of whispers, jeers, and awkward questions left Andy slumped in
his seat in art class like a spent parachute. Although he had donned his creation
proudly that morning, he now wished he had a change of clothes.
16 “It hasn’t been a great day, huh?” asked Ms. Greene, sitting beside him.
17 “I’ve had better,” Andy replied glumly.
18 “You know, it’s fine to want to do something different—you just have to be
prepared for the consequences. Not everyone is going to see things the way you
do—not right away, and maybe not ever.”
19 “They don’t know anything about fashion,” Andy snipped.
20 “Well, people like different styles,” Ms. Greene responded. “As for me . . . I like
your incredible fabric choice. Think of this outfit as just the beginning; think of it
as your first draft. The most famous designers didn’t build their clothing empires
on one outfit—especially their first.”
21 Andy knew she was right, of course. But still, he hadn’t thought his design
would warrant such ridicule. He sighed as he rose from his chair, putting his
sketch pad and pencils into his backpack. “A first draft, huh?” he thought. And
then he remembered what his English teacher Mrs. Ford always said: your first
draft is just the beginning.
22 Apparently that was good advice—and not just for writers.
Reading
Page 30STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
37 The main role of Andy’s art teacher in this story is to help —
A resolve a conflict the main character is experiencing
B create the setting in which the main conflict occurs
C develop the rising action of the plot to a turning point
D supply background information about the main character
38 What is the best summary of the story?
F Andy wants to use his knowledge of tailoring to design original clothing. His father gives
him a sewing machine, so Andy creates an outfit. When Andy wears his new clothing to
school, he does not get the response that he wants, but his art teacher helps him regain
confidence.
G As Andy waits for Broden, he observes the other students’ clothing. When Andy arrives at
his family’s shop, he realizes that being a tailor helps people feel better. After his father
gives him a sewing machine, Andy begins working on a unique clothing design.
H After closing the family store for the night, Andy’s father gives Andy a sewing machine
that has been in the family for years. Andy is excited and immediately begins creating his
own clothing designs. He works hard on his new design and wears his new outfit to school.
J Andy knows a lot about clothing because of the family business, but he wants to do
something different. Andy’s father understands his interests, so he gives Andy an old
sewing machine. Andy uses this gift to complete a school project.
39 Which sentence from the story creates an image of how tailoring can help people?
A Being from a family of tailors, Andy had learned a lot about clothing over the years—how
to make it and how to alter it. (paragraph 2)
B Mr. Simone paid his bill and then carefully, almost proudly, placed the newly perfected
pants over his arm. (paragraph 4)
C There was no denying that tailoring was a valuable service to some. (paragraph 4)
D That was exactly the reason Andy longed to create something of his own. (paragraph 6)
Reading
Page 31STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
40 In paragraph 15, the word donned means —
F mended
G thought about
H put on
J imagined
41 What lesson is referred to in the title of the story?
A Andy learning to work with clothing by watching his father
B Broden learning about fashion from Andy’s clothing designs
C Broden learning how to feel as proud of himself as Andy does
D Andy learning the consequences of trying something different
42 Read this sentence from paragraph 9.
Mostly he drew during the free minutes of his
day, when he could empty his mind and just
trust his charcoal pencil.
Based on this sentence, the reader can conclude that Andy —
F puts very little thought into his designs
G draws when he is bored and has nothing else to do
H feels compelled to sketch his designs at every opportunity
J is unsure about how to use special drawing techniques
Reading
Page 32STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
43 Which sentence best expresses a theme in the story?
A “Often, when people look better, they act better too.” (paragraph 5)
B A visit to the fabric store that weekend turned into an expedition as he hunted down the
perfect textiles for his creation. (paragraph 10)
C On his way back home, he looked at what people were wearing, the parade of pants,
shirts, dresses, jeans, and ordinariness. (paragraph 11)
D “Not everyone is going to see things the way you do—not right away, and maybe not
ever.” (paragraph 18)
44 Read this sentence from paragraph 15.
A morning full of whispers, jeers, and awkward
questions left Andy slumped in his seat in art
class like a spent parachute.
The author uses a simile in this sentence to illustrate —
F how difficult it can be to concentrate in Andy’s art class
G how perplexed the students are about Andy’s new outfit
H how discouraged Andy feels by his peers’ reactions to his outfit
J how exhausting a typical day at Andy’s school is
Reading
Page 33
STOP
BE SURE YOU HAVE RECORDED ALL OF YOUR ANSWERS
ON THE ANSWER DOCUMENT.STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
Reading
Page 34STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01
STAAR
GRADE 8
Reading
April 2019STAAR Reading10/08/2019G8RSP19R_rev01