New York State administered the English Language Arts Tests in
April 2021 and is now making the questions from Session 1 of these tests
available for review and use. Only Session 1 was required in 2021.New York State Testing Program
Grade 8
English Language Arts Test
Released Questions
2021
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program
Grades 3–8 English Language Arts
Released Questions from 2021 Tests
Background
In 2013, New York State (NYS) began administering tests designed to assess student performance in
accordance with the instructional shifts and rigor demanded by the new New York State P–12
Learning Standards in English Language Arts (ELA). To help in this transition to new assessments,
the New York State Education Department (NYSED) has been releasing a number of test questions
from the tests that were administered to students across the State in the spring. This year, NYSED
is again releasing 2021 NYS Grades 3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics test materials for
review, discussion, and use.
In February 2021, with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic still forcing restrictions on all educational
and learning activities statewide, NYSED submitted two federal waiver requests related to state
assessment and accountability requirements. The waiver requests addressed the unique
circumstances caused by the pandemic that have resulted in many students receiving some or all
of their instruction remotely.
Later that month, the United States Department of Education (USDE) informed states that it would
not grant a blanket waiver for state assessments. However, the USDE agreed to uncouple state
assessments from the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) accountability requirements so that test
results will be used solely as a measure of student learning. Additionally, it was decided that NYSED
would administer only Session 1 of the Grades 3–8 ELA and Mathematics Tests for the Spring 2021
administration and that the tests would include previously administered questions.
The decision to use previously administered test questions in this extraordinary year was based on
guidance from nationally recognized experts in the assessment field and was recommended in a
publication from the Council of Chief State School Officers to state education departments. Reusing
test questions provided the benefit of having established scale scores and stable item parameters.
Using previously administered test questions also ensured that it will be possible to develop new
test forms for 2022 and beyond. Although it was not the driver of the decision, the reuse of
previously administered test questions provided an opportunity for cost savings during these
unique circumstances where the instructional models used by schools varied throughout the State.
For 2021, the entire Session 1 booklet is being released as this is all that students were required
to take. Additionally, NYSED is providing information about the released passages; the associated
text complexity for each passage; a map that details what learning standards each released
question measures; and the correct response to each question. These released materials will
help students, families, educators, and the public better understand the tests and NYSED’s
expectations for students.
Understanding ELA Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P–12 Learning Standards in
English Language Arts. These questions ask students to analyze different aspects of a given text,
including central idea, style elements, character and plot development, and vocabulary. Almost
all questions, including vocabulary questions, will be answered correctly only if the student
comprehends and makes use of the whole passage.
For multiple-choice questions, students select the correct response from four answer choices.
Multiple- choice questions assess reading standards in a variety of ways. Some ask students to
analyze aspects of text or vocabulary. Many questions require students to combine skills. For
example, questions may ask students to identify a segment of text that best supports the central
idea. To answer these questions correctly, a student must first comprehend the central idea and
then show understanding of how that idea is supported. Questions tend to require more than rote
recall or identification.
New York State P–12 Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment to the New York State P–12 Learning Standards for English Language Arts is intended
to identify the analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. The released
questions do not represent the full spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in
the classroom. It should not be assumed that a particular standard will be measured by an
identical question in future assessments. Specific criteria for writing test questions, as well as
additional assessment information, are available at http://www.engageny.org/common-core-
assessments.
2021 Grade 8 ELA Test Text Complexity Metrics
For Released Questions
Selecting high-quality, grade-appropriate passages requires both objective text
complexity metrics and expert judgment. For the Grades 3–8 assessments based on the
New York State P–12 Learning Standards for English Language Arts, both quantitative and
qualitative rubrics are used to determine the complexity of the texts and their appropriate
placement within a grade-level ELA exam.
Quantitative measures of text complexity are used to measure aspects of text complexity
that are difficult for a human reader to evaluate when examining a text. These aspects
include word frequency, word length, sentence length, and text cohesion. These aspects
are efficiently measured by computer programs. While quantitative text complexity
metrics are a helpful start, they are not definitive.
Qualitative measures are a crucial complement to quantitative measures. Using
qualitative measures of text complexity involves making an informed decision about the
difficulty of a text in terms of one or more factors discernible to a human reader applying
trained judgment to the task. To qualitatively determine the complexity of a text,
educators use a rubric composed of five factors; four of these factors are required and
one factor is optional. The required criteria are: meaning, text structure, language
features, and knowledge demands. The optional factor, graphics, is used only if a graphic
appears in the text.
To make the final determination as to whether a text is at grade-level and thus
appropriate to be included on a Grades 3–8 assessment, New York State uses a two-step
review process, which is an industry best-practice. First, all prospective passages undergo
quantitative text complexity analysis using three text complexity measures. If at least two
of the three measures suggest that the passage is grade-appropriate, the passage then
moves to the second step, which is the qualitative review using the text-complexity
rubrics. Only passages that are determined appropriate by at least two of three
quantitative measures of complexity and are determined appropriate by the qualitative
measure of complexity are deemed appropriate for use on the exam.
For more information about text selection, complexity, and the review process please
refer to:
https://www.engageny.org/resource/new-york-state-passage-selection-resources-
for-grade-3-8-assessments
https://www.engageny.org/resource/selection-of-authentic-texts-for-common-core-
instruction-guidance-and-a-list-of-resources
https://www.engageny.org/resource/december-2014-nti-understanding-text-
complexity-grades-9-12
Text Complexity Metrics for 2021 Grade 8 Passages
Passage Title Word
Count
Lexile
Flesch-Kincaid
Reading Maturity
M t i *
Degrees of
Reading Power*
Qualitative
Review
Fly for Your Life 977 960L 6.0 57 Appropriate
Excerpt from River of Dreams 647 1000L 7.4 58 Appropriate
Excerpt from A la Carte 826 1160L 8.4 58 Appropriate
Excerpt from Wheels of Change: How
Women Rode the Bicycle to Freedom (With
a Few Flat Tires Along the Way) 1029 1170L 10.4 65
Appropriate
So Much Happiness 214
N/A,
poem
N/A,
poem
N/A,
poem
Appropriate
Excerpt from Gadgets: Built To Not Last 327 1200L 9.9 65 Appropriate
Don't Fix Your Fridge, Just Buy a New One 394 1110L 9.5 65 Appropriate
* Depending on when the passage was selected, either the Reading Maturity Metric or Degrees of Reading Power was
used as the third quantitative metric.
New York State 2021 Quantitative Text Complexity Chart for Assessment and Curriculum
To determine if a text’s quantitative complexity is at the appropriate grade level, New
York State uses the table below. In cases where a text is excerpted from a large work, only
the complexity of the excerpt that students see on the test is measured, not the large
work, so it is possible that the complexity of a book might be above or below grade level,
but the text used on the assessment is at grade level. Because the measurement of text
complexity is inexact, quantitative measures of complexity are defined by grade band
rather than by individual grade level and then paired with the qualitative review by an
educator.
Grade
Band ATOS
Degrees of
Reading
Power Flesch-Kincaid
The Lexile
Framework
Reading
Maturity SourceRater
2nd–3rd 2.75 – 5.14 42 – 54 1.98 – 5.34 420 – 820 3.53 – 6.13 0.05 – 2.48
4th–5th 4.97 – 7.03 52 – 60 4.51 – 7.73 740 – 1010 5.42 – 7.92 0.84 – 5.75
6th–8th 7.00 – 9.98 57 – 67 6.51 – 10.34 925 – 1185 7.04 – 9.57 4.11 – 10.66
9th–10th 9.67 – 12.01 62 – 72 8.32 – 12.12 1050 – 1335 8.41 – 10.81 9.02 – 13.93
11th–12th 11.20 – 14.10 67 – 74 10.34 – 14.20 1185 – 1385 9.57 – 12.00 12.30 – 14.50
Source: Student Achievement Partners

Excerpt from “Fly for Your Life” by John Frizell, Odyssey, 2010. Copyright © 2010 by Cricket Media. Used with permission of Carus
Publishing Company via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt(s) from RIVER OF DREAMS: THE STORY OF THE HUDSON RIVER by Hudson Talbott, copyright © 2009 by Hudson Talbott.
Used by permission of G.P. Putnam’s Sons Books for Young Readers, an imprint of Penguin Young Readers Group, a division of Penguin
Random House LLC. All rights reserved.
Excerpt(s) from A LA CARTE by Tanita S. Davis, 2008 by Tanita S. Davis. Used with permission of Alfred A. Knopf, an imprint of Random
House Children’s Books, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. All rights reserved.
Excerpt from Wheels of Change: How Women Rode the Bicycle to Freedom (With a Few Flat Tires Along the Way) by Sue Macy. Copyright ©
2011 by Sue Macy. Used with permission of the National Geographic Society via Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by Questar Assessment Inc., 5550 Upper 147th
Street West, Minneapolis, MN 55124. Copyright © 2021 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1
Session 1
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some suggestions to help you do your best:
• Be sure to read all the directions carefully.
• Most questions will make sense only when you read the whole passage. You may read
the passage more than once to answer a question. When a question includes a quotation
from a passage, be sure to keep in mind what you learned from reading the whole
passage. You may need to review both the quotation and the passage in order to answer
the question correctly.
• Read each question carefully and think about the answer before making your choice.
Page 1Session 1
Alan is on a volcano on Titan, a moon of Saturn. As the story opens, Alan is stranded on its
summit in his space crawler. Luckily, he has brought along his mechanical wings.
Excerpt from
Fly for Your Life
by John Frizell
Alan knew there was no way back to the base and no way the crew there could help
him remotely—the other crawler was down for maintenance. He could go down this
side of the stream for 23 kilometers, to a flat area where the flowing liquid would
spread out and be shallow enough to cross; then go back 23 kilometers to the far side of
the bridge. One problem: he would definitely run out of air before he got there.
1
en Alan thought of the folded flight wings he had attached to his suit. Could he fly
across the river and then walk to the base? Some quick calculations showed it wouldn’t
work. He had enough air, but the battery that powered the heater of the suit he wore to
stay alive on Titan was only good for an hour, not the four-hour walk it would take to
reach the base. Spacewalks were usually done trailing a power cable plugged in to the
suit. e cable carried power from the crawler to supplement the suit’s battery. Without
the supplemental power, he would freeze solid in 10 minutes once the battery was
exhausted.
2
Alan knew flying the whole way was impossible. Even with Titan’s thick atmosphere
and low gravity the suit made flying hard work, worse than running uphill carrying a
sack of cement. No one could stay alo for more than 10 minutes. It would be at least a
half-hour flight to the base.
3
He needed more than wings alone to get back alive. en it came to him. Bolted to
the side of the crawler was a squat, black cylinder containing compressed nitrogen at
200 bar, compressed Titanian atmosphere in fact, used for cleaning gunk off the
crawler’s treads. Alan struggled with the bolts, working carefully in the searing cold
with tools as brittle as glass. When he had the cylinder off, propped up, and pointing at
the sky, he put his wings on, and then took them off, repeating the task until he could
do it without thinking about it. . . .
4
Page 2GO ON
Session 1
Read this story. Then answer questions 1 through 7.
He pulled the power cable out of his suit’s hip socket and, before he could change his
mind, gave a sharp tug on a line that he had attached to the valve of the pressure
cylinder. e cylinder hissed like a giant snake, as high-pressure nitrogen blasted out,
and then shot into the sky. A length of climbing rope he had attached to it went taut
and snatched him into the air, where he was buffeted and tossed by the jet of nitrogen
pouring down on him. It was like being caught under a breaking wave, pounded again
and again by the surf. He was directly under the cylinder, using his weight and drag to
keep the nozzle pointed down as the cylinder loed him into Titan’s sky. e ground
beneath, blurred by the motion, made it impossible to gauge height or direction.
5
Time slowed; his shuddering world narrowed to the readout of the Titan Positioning
System (TPS)—the icy moon’s equivalent of GPS. Gradually, the pounding lessened as
the rate of climb shown on the readout passed its peak and began falling. Alan waited.
Just before it hit zero, he cut the rope. e cylinder, relieved of his drag, flew off,
dwindling to a black dot and then disappearing into the empty sky above. Now he was
coasting upward, propelled by the momentum imparted to him by the nitrogen rocket.
He was high in the air, but already he was slowing under the drag of the thick
atmosphere. He had to get the wings on before the downward fall began. Once he
started to move with some speed, he would begin to spin and never get them on. e
first wing stuck and he had to take his arm out of the loops and try again. . . .
6
He was gathering speed on his way down before he got the second one on. He spread
his wings and rolled into a comfortable position, soaring over the moon’s dimly lit
surface. e TPS showed that he was heading away from the base. He banked in an
easy curve and settled on a course for home. All he had to do was hold the wings rigid
and enjoy the ride. He took an occasional flap, just for fun. . . .
7
As Alan glided toward the base, he flapped more oen, watching the height-above-
surface and distance-to-target displays. As they unwound, an unpleasant feeling, like a
trace of the frigid atmosphere outside, crept into his stomach. His elevation was
dropping dangerously, with over three kilometers le to go on distance-to-target. He
could see details on the surface more clearly now, because he was flying so low. . . .
8
Alan forced himself to stay calm. Panic would mean disaster. He started flapping his
wings faster, faster, faster. . . . He could feel himself liing with every beat of the
massive appendages. Faster, faster, faster. . . . His descent rate began to slow, but the
muscles in his arms burned with pain. . . .
9
Time stretched out endlessly.10
Page 3Session 1
GO ON
e TPS buzzed loudly in his helmet. Target. e station’s beacon was directly below
him. He could barely feel his arms, but something made them stop flapping. He
gratefully fell out of the sky, wrapped in a ball of pain, with barely the strength to flare
his wings one last time for a so landing. . . .
11
en he saw someone running toward him with a power cable in hand. Voices
boomed into his helmet. It sounded like the whole station was in the control room
waiting to see if he had made it.
12
“Alan! ALAN! Say something! Can you move? Are you receiving this?” He
recognized the voice of the base leader. . . .
13
As the crew lied him carefully onto a stretcher, he looked up at Titan’s hazy sky.
I
flew for my life today, he thought.
I survived. at’s the only record that matters.
14
Page 4GO ON
Session 1
Paragraphs 1 through 4 reveal that Alan is
A discouraged aer several of his ideas fail
B overwhelmed and dismayed by his environment
C adventurous and enjoying the current challenge
D focused even in a life and death situation
In paragraph 4, what is the effect of the simile “with tools as brittle as glass”?
A It affects the plot by explaining that the tools were hard to see.
B It creates suspense by showing that the tools were missing some pieces.
C It adds to the setting by suggesting that the tools were reflecting light off the
snow.
D It increases danger by emphasizing that the tools were breakable in the cold.
Why does Alan use the compressed nitrogen?
A e nitrogen’s energy will propel him toward the base before he runs out of
air.
B e nitrogen is used for emergencies when astronauts become stranded.
C e nitrogen will stay liquid in the atmosphere.
D e nitrogen’s cable can be cut and it will continue to work.
1
2
3
Page 5Session 1
GO ON
What quotation best reveals Alan’s character?
A “As Alan glided toward the base, he flapped more oen, watching the
height-above-surface and distance-to-target displays.” (paragraph 8)
B “He could see details on the surface more clearly now, because he was flying
so low.” (paragraph 8)
C “Alan forced himself to stay calm. Panic would mean disaster.”
(paragraph 9)
D “His descent rate began to slow, but the muscles in his arms burned with
pain.” (paragraph 9)
In paragraph 9, “appendages” refers to something that
A calms a person
B is attached
C slows things down
D is lightweight
e main way the point of view affects the story is by making it
A formal
B lighthearted
C humorous
D suspenseful
4
5
6
Page 6GO ON
Session 1
Which sentence would be most important to include in a summary of the story?
A A cable connects space suits to a power source for spacewalks.
B e power from the nitrogen blast allows Alan to travel farther and faster.
C Alan soars away from his target during part of his flight.
D e weather on Titan is cold and hazy.
7
Page 7Session 1
GO ON
is excerpt is from a book about the history of the Hudson River.
Excerpt from
River of Dreams
by Hudson Talbott
By the twentieth century, New York City had long since reached its destiny of
becoming the most powerful city in America. In less than 300 years it had grown from
a tiny Dutch outpost in the wilderness to the business capital of the world. It was a city
built on dreams.
1
But it was made out of bricks and cement that had come from the banks of the
Hudson. e river which had fed all those dreams was now fading into the background.
New York didn’t seem to need the river anymore, except as a sewer. And that’s what it
became.
2
Industry on the river had made some New Yorkers filthy rich. But it had just made
the river filthy. Garbage, factory waste, plant chemicals and the raw sewage of the cities
and towns along its banks were dumped directly into the river. e water turned
greenish brown, except by the GM plant, where it turned red or yellow or whatever
color they were painting the cars that day.
3
e fishing industry collapsed. e few fish that survived were too poisonous to eat.
Smog from the factory smoke and dust from the cement plants blanketed the valley.
And it was all legal.
4
Most people don’t start out with dreams of polluting a river. But it was oen the
result of people chasing their dreams of wealth with little care of how they reached it.
e Hudson Valley had always drawn them.
5
But now there were other dreamers in the valley, with their own dreams of wealth.
ey dreamed of the wealth of wildlife in a healthy forest, the abundance of fish in
oxygen-rich water, and the great fortune of living in a beautiful river valley.
6
So perhaps it was a matter of time before the two types of dreamers would meet each
other—in court.
7
Page 8GO ON
Session 1
Read this article. Then answer questions 8 through 14.
In 1963, Con Edison, New York City’s power company, proposed a plan for
constructing the largest hydroelectric pumping station ever built. e plan called for
carving out a gigantic hole in the side of majestic Storm King Mountain on the Hudson
River.
8
But then they met Franny Reese. Franny was a longtime valley resident with a simple
point to make: the mountain could not speak for itself. If she didn’t speak for it, who
would?
9
Franny and a group of like-minded people founded Scenic Hudson and took on the
power company in a landmark court case. Con Ed challenged the right of private
citizens to participate, but the court sided with the citizens, in the ruling now known as
the Scenic Hudson Decision.
10
Aer dragging out the case for seventeen years, Con Ed finally gave up and Storm
King survived unblemished. It was the beginning of the environmental movement in
this country, and once again, the Hudson Valley was the birthplace.
11
More and more people joined the movement as they realized how much difference
each of us can make.
12
e love of their land was still alive in the hearts of Americans, and now that it was
aroused again, things began to change.
13
Many new laws and new citizens’ groups have been inspired by those early heroes of
the environment, and their work has begun to bring the Hudson back to life.
14
e Mahicans called it “e River at Flows Both Ways.” Slowly we are learning
that taking care of the river is the only way that the river can take care of us.
15
Fiy years have passed since I dreamed of going to New York to see the river that
shares my name, and thirty-five years since that dream came true. I live in the Hudson
Valley now, grateful to all those who came before me, following their dreams to this
river, building this nation, sharing its beauty, securing its future.
16
It’s now my turn to help in keeping the river of dreams flowing, for all those
dreamers yet to come.
17
Page 9Session 1
GO ON
As used in paragraph 2, what does the phrase “fading into the background” mean?
A disappearing from view
B losing its importance in people’s minds
C moving farther and farther from the city
D remaining important only to those who value nature
Which claim from the article is least supported?
A “New York didn’t seem to need the river anymore, except as a sewer. And
that’s what it became.” (paragraph 2)
B “Industry on the river had made some New Yorkers filthy rich.”
(paragraph 3)
C “But it had just made the river filthy.” (paragraph 3)
D “But now there were other dreamers in the valley, with their own dreams of
wealth.” (paragraph 6)
What is the role of paragraph 7 in the organization of the article?
A It compares the two groups of dreamers.
B It concludes the part of the article about industry.
C It introduces the part of the article about activists.
D It transitions to the part of the article where change occurs.
8
9
10
Page 10GO ON
Session 1
What does “unblemished” mean as used in paragraph 11?
A unaware
B unknown
C unharmed
D unstable
How does the idea expressed in paragraph 15 relate to the article?
A ere are two main ways that the river can be fixed.
B e river is able to move in two different directions.
C People who benefit from the river must also protect it.
D Opposing groups can each get what they want from the river.
Which sentence is most important to include in a summary of the article?
A One company colored the river red and yellow with excess car paint.
B e Hudson River became polluted in the effort to gain wealth.
C e Mahicans have a saying about taking care of the river.
D e author has dreamed of returning to the Hudson River for fiy years.
11
12
13
Page 11Session 1
GO ON
Which quotation best expresses the author’s point of view in the article?
A “In less than 300 years it had grown from a tiny Dutch outpost in the
wilderness to the business capital of the world.” (paragraph 1)
B
“In 1963, Con Edison, New York City’s power company, proposed a plan
for constructing the largest hydroelectric pumping station ever built.”
(paragraph 8)
C “More and more people joined the movement as they realized how much
difference each of us can make.” (paragraph 12)
D “It’s now my turn to help in keeping the river of dreams flowing, for all
those dreamers yet to come.” (paragraph 17)
14
Page 12GO ON
Session 1
Excerpt from
A la Carte
by Tanita S. Davis
“Homework?” My mother mouths the word exaggeratedly, eyebrows raised, and I
roll my eyes. Frowning, she points with her chin to the side door that leads to the stairs.
I roll my eyes again, mouthing, Okay, okay, not needing her to pantomime further what
she wants me to do. I hate the thought of leaving the clattering nerve center of the
restaurant to wrestle with my trigonometry homework in my mother’s quiet office
downstairs.
1
“Order!”2
e bright lights and swirl of noise and motion are muffled as the kitchen door
swings closed behind me.
3
It’s hard to remember a time when the restaurant hasn’t been the center of our lives.
Mom used to be a copy editor and wrote food features for our local paper, the
Clarion,
and she met Pia when she did a write-up on the culinary school Pia attended. Pia
thinks it was fate that Mom wanted to invest in a restaurant at the same time Pia
wanted to buy the old bank building.
4
La Salle Rouge doesn’t serve much in the way of “kid” food, since the menu doesn’t
cater to people my age on a cheap date, but I’ve loved everything about it from the first.
I started experimenting with being a vegetarian when I turned fourteen, but Pia still
found things to feed me and taught me to be creative with vegetables and tofu. I like to
think I’m the best-fed vegetarian in the state of California.
5
Pia’s been really good about teaching what she knows, and I decided early on that
this is the work I want to do—get out of school and get into the kitchen for good. Mom
and Pia have created a popular French-Asian-Californian fusion restaurant that has
gotten great reviews from food critics. ey took the best of each other’s tastes—
Mom’s traditional Southern flavors and Pia’s French training combined with her
vegetable- and spice-savvy Cambodian tastes—and pulled off what one food critic
called “stylized food with unique flavor combinations in an intimate setting.”
6
Whatever that means.7
Page 13Session 1
GO ON
Read this story. Then answer questions 15 through 21.
_______________________
1patron saint: an inspiring person admired for his or her work
ree years ago, when I started high school thirty pounds heavier than everyone in
my class, Mom and I came up with a light menu for La Salle Rouge, and it’s been such a
popular idea that Mom lets me come up with tasty, low-calorie desserts, which is one of
my favorite things to do. It hardly seems fair that I have to walk away from all of that
just to do trigonometry, but my mom says I have to finish school before I concentrate
on cooking. She says it’s smarter to have a “backup plan,” and she’s made me apply to
plenty of colleges and check out business majors just in case I ever want to do anything
else with my life. I guess that makes sense if you’re anybody other than me. When I
turn eighteen, I already know what I’m going to do.
8
First, I’m going to buy a plane ticket to D.C. and go to Julia Child’s kitchen at the
Smithsonian and leave roses. ey don’t let you walk through it, but somewhere—I
don’t know where—I’m going to leave a bouquet and a little note for her. Julia Child is
my patron saint.1 She’s the queen of all reasons people can do anything they want in
life. Saint Julia didn’t start cooking until she was practically forty, and she went on to
do TV shows and make cookbooks and be this huge part of culinary history. She never
got too fancy, she never freaked out, and she was never afraid to try new things. I want
to be just like her—except maybe get famous faster.
9
e second thing I’m going to do is buy myself a set of knives. Pia swears by this set
of German steel knives she got when she graduated, but I’ve seen the TV chef Kylie
Kwong use a phenomenal-looking ceramic knife on her show on the Discovery
Channel. Either way, knives are what the best chefs have of their very own.
10
e third thing I’m going to do, aer I get back from Washington and get my knives,
is . . . get discovered. Somehow. I know I’m going to have to pay my dues, but I’m so
ready for my real life to start. It’s not something I admit to a lot, but my real dream is to
be a celebrity chef. Do you know how many African American female chefs there
aren’t? And how many vegetarian chefs have their own shows? e field is wide open
for stardom. Every time I watch old episodes of Saint Julia, I imagine that I have my
own cooking show. e way celebrity chefs do it now, I could also have a line of
cooking gear, cookbooks, aprons, the works. People would know my name, ask for my
autograph, and try my recipes. All I have to do is finish my trig homework and get back
into the kitchen.
11
Page 14GO ON
Session 1
In paragraph 1, what does the phrase “clattering nerve center of the restaurant” suggest?
A messiness, chaos
B energy, core
C tension, anxiety
D greatness, stability
Which quotation best expresses a central idea of the story?
A “I started experimenting with being a vegetarian when I turned
fourteen . . .” (paragraph 5)
B “. . . I decided early on that this is the work I want to do . . .” (paragraph 6)
C “It hardly seems fair that I have to walk away from all of that . . .”
(paragraph 8)
D “. . . just in case I ever want to do anything else with my life.” (paragraph 8)
Read this sentence from paragraph 9.
She’s the queen of all reasons people can do anything they want in life.
What does this sentence suggest about Julia Child?
A Her famous kitchen became part of a cooking museum.
B She was successful in a career that interested her.
C She always remained calm in the kitchen.
D Her cooking style created unique flavor combinations.
15
16
17
Page 15Session 1
GO ON
In paragraph 11, what does the one-word statement “Somehow” reveal?
A It illustrates the narrator’s enthusiasm about her future plans.
B It shows the narrator has some questions about whether she will succeed or
not.
C It shows the narrator does not have every detail of her future plans figured
out just yet.
D It demonstrates the narrator’s lack of knowledge about how difficult her
goals are to achieve.
What does the statement “I know I’m going to have to pay my dues” (paragraph 11) show
about the narrator’s attitude toward her plans?
A She thinks the price of fame might be too high.
B She realizes success depends on more than setting a goal.
C She is highly motivated by the idea of becoming famous.
D She thinks becoming a celebrity chef requires only money.
Which sentence would be most important to include in a summary of the story?
A When the narrator’s mother makes her do homework, the narrator rolls her
eyes.
B When the narrator’s mother wanted to invest in a restaurant, Pia wanted to
buy the old bank building.
C e narrator admires celebrity chefs.
D e narrator lives in California.
18
19
20
Page 16GO ON
Session 1
e author develops the narrator’s point of view mainly through the use of
A internal monologue
B conflict between characters
C limited dialogue
D flashback
21
Page 17Session 1
GO ON
Excerpt from
Wheels of Change: How
Women Rode the Bicycle to Freedom
(With a Few Flat Tires Along the Way)
by Sue Macy
Women’s rights crusader Elizabeth Cady Stanton was in her eighties during the
heyday of the bicycle, and no evidence exists to show that she actually ever rode one.
But there was no better or more eloquent advocate for women and the wheel. In 1895,
Stanton contributed an article to the
American Wheelman celebrating this “wonderful
new style of locomotion.” In the article, titled “e Era of the Bicycle,” she pointed out
that cycling was increasing people’s mobility, eliminating the cost of feeding and
housing horses, and encouraging the building of good roads. However, she saved her
greatest praise for the bicycle’s effects on women. “e bicycle,” she wrote, “will inspire
women with more courage, self-respect and self-reliance and make the next generation
more vigorous of mind and of body; for feeble mothers do not produce great
statesmen, scientists and scholars.”
1
For all the practical benefits of the two-wheeler, the fact is that it brought about a
cosmic shi in women’s private and public lives. With the rise of industry and the
move from a rural to an urban economy in the 19th century, American women had
become increasingly confined to their homes. Young girls could play outside, but when
they matured, their freedom of movement was greatly restricted. “At sixteen years of
age, I was enwrapped in the long skirts that impeded every footstep,” remembered
Frances Willard, who in 1895 wrote a best-selling account of how she learned to ride a
bicycle at age 53. “I have detested walking and felt with a certain noble disdain that the
conventions of life had cut me off from what . . . had been one of life’s sweetest joys.”
2
Page 18GO ON
Session 1
Read this article. Then answer questions 22 through 28.
While wealthier women were saddled with long skirts and restrictive corsets, those
who were less well off worked anonymously in mills and factories. All in all, the result
was the same. Except in a few instances, the public image of America was male.
Politicians, soldiers, business leaders, and even the leading athletes in the new sports of
baseball and football were all men. But the bicycle changed that. Suddenly, women
were leaving their homes to cycle and socialize on country roads and city streets.
Bicycle racers such as Louise Armaindo and Frankie Nelson had their exploits splashed
all over the papers. Bicycle manufacturers, intent on mining an untapped market,
showed female models in their advertisements. anks to the wheel, women were
starting to be seen and heard in public life.
3
It was not a stretch for some cyclists to see the possibility of a larger role for women
in the world. When she conquered the wheel, Frances Willard was a former university
president and the longtime president of the Woman’s Christian Temperance Union,
which fought to prohibit the use of alcoholic beverages and to win women the right to
vote. Willard saw parallels between learning to ride and learning to live. “I began to feel
that myself plus the bicycle equaled myself plus the world, upon whose spinning wheel
we must all learn to ride,” she wrote. “He who succeeds, or, to be more exact in handing
over my experience, she who succeeds in gaining the mastery of [a bicycle], will gain
the mastery of life.”
4
For decades, Willard, along with Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, and
many others, had been working toward increased political and economic rights for
women. Now the bicycle brought a taste of independence to women on a very personal
level, and some of them took the opportunity to express their discontent with old
traditions and expectations. In August 1895, a cyclist named Ann Strong caused a stir
when she compared the value of a bicycle to that of a husband in the
Minneapolis
Tribune. “I can’t see but that a wheel is just as good company as most husbands,” she
declared. “I would as lief1 talk to one inanimate object as another; and I’d a great deal
rather talk to one that can’t answer than one that won’t.” Strong then contrasted the joy
of cycling with the challenges of raising a family. “You can make your wheel tidy over
night,” she said, “and it never kicks off its shoes the very last minute, and never smears
itself with molasses. When you are ready you can start. No little elbows are stuck in
your ribs; there is no wiggling; screams at the cars or at the candy stores. You glide
along, silently, smoothly, swily.”
5
Page 19Session 1
GO ON
_______________________
1lief: happily
Some stated the liberating effects of the bicycle with less sarcasm. “e bicycle has
brought to women a healthful, wholesome means of securing a degree of freedom and
independence that no amount of discussion regarding ‘women’s rights’ would ever
have produced,” wrote the
L.A.W. Bulletin and Good Roads magazine in 1898.
Meanwhile,
Munsey’s Magazine assessed the impact of the wheel on women in a
special bicycle-themed issue. “If she has ridden her bicycle into new fields, becoming in
the process a new creature, it has been gradually and unconsciously,” the editors wrote.
6
“She did not have to be born again in some mysterious fashion, becoming a strange
creature, a ‘new woman.’ She is more like the ‘eternal feminine,’ who has taken on
wings, and who is using them with an ever increasing delight in her new power.”
Indeed, many bicycle companies at home and abroad did put wings on the women in
their advertisements, emphasizing that they had taken flight.
7
Not all publications treated the emergence of the “new woman” with the same level
of approval. Some mocked her, while others just seemed baffled by her. Her new way of
dressing, in bloomers or divided skirts or skirts with shortened hems, certainly
disturbed the old social order, but so did her confidence and daring. ese traits led
commentators to worry that the differences between the sexes were being blurred, a
fear that was reinforced as the four newest states—Wyoming, Colorado, Utah, and
Idaho—granted women the right to vote in the 1890s. Would the bicycle help bring
about a new kind of equality between men and women? Elizabeth Cady Stanton and
her colleagues certainly hoped so. At any rate, the image of a female cyclist quickly
became associated with efforts to win more rights for women.
8
Page 20GO ON
Session 1
As it relates to the information in the article, what does “With a Few Flat Tires Along the Way”
in the title suggest?
A Women rode bicycles along rough and unpaved roads.
B Women encountered resistance to their efforts.
C Women had a difficult time learning to ride bicycles.
D Women were unused to dealing with mechanical issues.
Read this sentence from paragraph 2.
“At sixteen years of age, I was enwrapped in the long skirts that impeded every
footstep,” remembered Frances Willard, who in 1895 wrote a best-selling account of
how she learned to ride a bicycle at age 53.
Which word from the sentence best helps the reader understand the meaning of “impeded”?
A enwrapped
B every
C footstep
D remembered
22
23
Page 21Session 1
GO ON
Read this sentence from paragraph 3.
But the bicycle changed that.
How does the sentence develop an idea?
A It marks a transition.
B It introduces an example.
C It refines a previous statement.
D It provides evidence for a claim.
What do the details in paragraph 3 reveal about the author’s point of view?
A e author thinks that clothing restrictions were less of a burden than the
necessity of hard work.
B e author thinks that all women were treated unfairly regardless of
economic status.
C e author thinks that poor women had more freedom of dress even
though they had to work hard.
D e author thinks that the contrast between two classes of women had an
effect on their advancement.
24
25
Page 22GO ON
Session 1
What idea about women riding bicycles is emphasized in paragraphs 6 and 7?
A Riding bicycles offered more than just freedom of movement.
B Riding bicycles was a simple way to participate in a political movement.
C Riding bicycles changed women’s fashion.
D Riding bicycles was a popular subject in magazines.
A distinction the author makes between Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Frances Willard is that
only
A Stanton wrote in favor of women riding bicycles
B Willard was actually known to ride a bicycle
C Stanton was actually criticized for riding a bicycle
D Willard was a true spokeswoman for the bicycle
Which quotation best expresses the central idea of the article?
A “Young girls could play outside, but when they matured, their freedom of
movement was greatly restricted.” (paragraph 2)
B “Suddenly, women were leaving their homes to cycle and socialize on
country roads and city streets.” (paragraph 3)
C “anks to the wheel, women were starting to be seen and heard in public
life.” (paragraph 3)
D “It was not a stretch for some cyclists to see the possibility of a larger role
for women in the world.” (paragraph 4)
26
27
28
Page 23Session 1
STOP

Grade 8
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
v202
Question Type Key Points Standard Strand Subscore Secondary Standard(s)
1 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.3 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
2 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.4 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
3 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.3 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
4 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.3 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
5 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.8.4 Language Standards Reading
6 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.6 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
7 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.2 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
8 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.4 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
9 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.8 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
10 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.5 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
11 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.8.4 Language Standards Reading
12 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.3 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
13 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.2 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
14 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.6 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
15 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.4 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
16 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.2 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
17 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.3 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
18 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.3 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
19 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.4 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
20 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.2 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
21 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.6 Reading Standards for Literature Reading
22 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.4 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
23 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.4 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
24 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.5 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
25 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.6 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
26 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.3 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
27 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.3 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
28 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.2 Reading Standards for Informational Text Reading
This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question on the 2021 operational ELA test.
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2021 English Language Arts Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 8 Released Questions
Session 1