New York State administered the Mathematics Tests in May 2021
and is now making the questions from Session 1 of these tests available
for review and use. Only Session 1 was required in 2021.New York State Testing Program
Grade 7
Mathematics Test
Released Questions
2021
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program
Grades 3–8 Mathematics
Released Questions from 2021 Tests
Background
In 2013, New York State (NYS) began administering tests designed to assess student performance in
accordance with the instructional shifts and rigor demanded by the new New York State P–12 Learning
Standards in Mathematics. To help in this transition to new assessments, the New York State Education
Department (NYSED) has been releasing an increasing number of test questions from the tests that were
administered to students across the State in the spring. This year, SED is again releasing 2021 NYS
Grades 3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics test materials for review, discussion, and use.
In February 2021, with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic still forcing restrictions on all educational and
learning activities statewide, NYSED submitted two federal waiver requests related to state assessment
and accountability requirements. The waiver requests addressed the unique circumstances caused by the
pandemic that have resulted in many students receiving some or all of their instruction remotely.
Later that month, the United States Department of Education (USDE) informed states that it would not
grant a blanket waiver for state assessments. However, the USDE agreed to uncouple state assessments
from the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) accountability requirements so that test results will be used
solely as a measure of student learning. Additionally, it was decided that NYSED would administer only
Session 1 of the Grades 3–8 ELA and Mathematics Tests for the Spring 2021 administration and that the
tests would include previously administered questions.
The decision to use previously administered test questions in this extraordinary year was based on
guidance from nationally recognized experts in the assessment field and was recommended in a
publication from the Council of Chief State School Officers to state education departments. Reusing test
questions provided the benefit of having established scale scores and stable item parameters. Using
previously administered test questions also ensured that it will be possible to develop new test forms for
2022 and beyond. Although it was not the driver of the decision, the reuse of previously administered test
questions provided an opportunity for cost savings during these unique circumstances where the
instructional models used by schools varied throughout the State.
For 2021, the entire Session 1 booklet is being released as this is all that students were required to take.
Additionally, NYSED is providing a map that details what learning standards each released question
measures, and the correct response to each question. These released materials will help students,
families, educators, and the public better understand the tests and NYSED’s expectations for students.
Understanding Math Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P–12 Learning Standards for
Mathematics. Mathematics multiple-choice questions will be used mainly to assess standard algorithms
and conceptual standards. Multiple-choice questions incorporate both the grade-level standards and the
“Standards for Mathematical Practices.” Many questions are framed within the context of real-world
applications or require students to complete multiple steps. Likewise, many of these questions are linked
to more than one standard, drawing on the simultaneous application of multiple skills and concepts.
New York State P–12 Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment to the New York State P–12 Learning Standards for Mathematics is intended to identify the
primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. The released questions do not
represent the full spectrum of the standards assessed on the State tests, nor do they represent the full
spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in the classroom. It should not be assumed
that a particular standard will be measured by an identical question in future assessments. Specific
criteria for writing test questions, as well as additional assessment information, are available at
http://www.engageny.org/common-core-assessments.

Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by Questar Assessment Inc., 5550 Upper 147th
Street West, Minneapolis, MN 55124. Copyright © 2021 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1
CONVERSIONS
FORMULAS
Grade 7 Mathematics Reference Sheet
Parallelogram
1 inch = 2.54 centimeters
1 meter = 39.37 inches
1 mile = 5,280 feet
1 mile = 1,760 yards
1 mile = 1.609 kilometers
1 kilometer = 0.62 mile
1 pound = 16 ounces
1 pound = 0.454 kilogram
1 kilogram = 2.2 pounds
1 ton = 2,000 pounds
1 cup = 8 fluid ounces
1 pint = 2 cups
1 quart = 2 pints
1 gallon = 4 quarts
1 gallon = 3.785 liters
1 liter = 0.264 gallon
1 liter = 1,000 cubic centimeters
A = bh
Triangle A = 1 bh
2
General Prisms V = Bh
Circle
Circle
A = πr 2
C = πd or C = 2πr

TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some suggestions to help you do your best:
• Read each question carefully and think about the answer before making your choice.
• You have been provided with mathematics tools (a ruler, a protractor, and a calculator)
and a reference sheet to use during the test. It is up to you to decide when each tool and
the reference sheet will be helpful. You should use mathematics tools and the reference
sheet whenever you think they will help you to answer the question.
Session 1
Page 1Session 1

Jordan is baking brownies and will choose to use either a round or a rectangular pan. The
dimensions of the bottom of each pan are shown below.
Which statement correctly describes how the area of the bottom of the round pan
compares to the area of the bottom of the rectangular pan?
A The area of the bottom of the round pan is greater than the area of the bottom
of the rectangular pan by about 8.5 square inches.
B The area of the bottom of the round pan is greater than the area of the bottom
of the rectangular pan by about 244.2 square inches.
C The area of the bottom of the round pan is less than the area of the bottom of the
rectangular pan by about 7.2 square inches.
D The area of the bottom of the round pan is less than the area of the bottom of the
rectangular pan by about 38.6 square inches.
On average, Shawnte drinks of a -ounce glass of water in hour. How much water
does she drink in an hour?
A ounce
B ounces
C ounces
D ounces
4
5
Page 3Session 1
GO ON

From midnight to a.m., the temperature decreased by . If the
original temperature was , which expression can be used to represent
this situation?
A
B
C
D
Jordan prepares name tags to use at a meeting. The number for each color
of name tag is described below.
of the name tags are blue
of the name tags are yellow
all of the remaining name tags are red
How many of Jordan’s name tags are red?
A
B
C
D
8
9
Page 5Session 1
GO ON
The ratio of boys to girls in Mr. Johnson’s after-school club is the same as the ratio
of boys to girls in Ms. Greene’s after-school club. There are 4 boys and 12 girls in
Mr. Johnson’s club. There are 6 boys in Ms. Greene’s club. How many girls are
in Ms. Greene’s club?
A 2
B 12
C 14
D 18
The regular price of an item at a store is dollars. The item is on sale for off the
regular price. Some of the expressions shown below represent the sale price, in dollars,
of the item.
Expression A:
Expression B:
Expression C:
Expression D:
Expression E:
Which two expressions each represent the sale price of the item?
A Expression A and Expression E
B Expression B and Expression C
C Expression B and Expression D
D Expression C and Expression D
10
11
Page 6GO ON
Session 1
Last week, the price of apples at a grocery store was per pound. This week, apples
at the same grocery store are on sale at a discount. What is the total price
of pounds of apples this week at the grocery store?
A
B
C
D
An object travels along a horizontal straight path at a constant rate. The object travels
of the length of the path in second. At that rate, how many seconds does it take
the object to travel the entire length of the path?
A
B
C
D
12
13
Page 7Session 1
GO ON
A furniture store has a sale during which the sale price of a sofa is off its original price.
The original price of the sofa is . A customer can get an additional discount
off the sale price for paying with cash. At checkout, a sales tax on the final price is
added to the cost of the sofa. What is the total cost of the sofa, including sales tax, for a
customer paying with cash?
A
B
C
D
14
Page 8GO ON
Session 1
Which table shows a proportional relationship between and ?
A
B
C
D
Which expression is equivalent to ?
A
B
C
D
15
16
Page 9Session 1
GO ON
A box contains paper clips of three different sizes. The numbers of each size of paper clip
are listed below.
small paper clips
medium paper clips
large paper clips
One paper clip is randomly selected from the box. What is the probability that the
paper clip selected is either small or medium?
A
B
C
D
What is of ?
A
B
C
D
17
18
Page 10GO ON
Session 1
Mario sells men’s and women’s shoes in his shoe store. He is considering selling children’s
shoes. He randomly selected 120 customers to participate in a survey. The survey results are
shown below.
42 customers said they would shop for children’s shoes
78 customers said they would not shop for children’s shoes
Mario has an average of 440 customers per month. Based on the survey results, which
value is the best estimate of the number of customers that would shop for children’s shoes
during an average month?
A 120
B 154
C 220
D 286
Danielle constructs a scale model of a building with a rectangular base. Her model is
2 inches in length and 1 inch in width. The scale on the model is 1 inch = 47 feet.
What is the actual area, in square feet, of the base of the building?
A 141
B 282
C 2,209
D 4,418
19
20
Page 11Session 1
GO ON
What value will make the equation true?
?
A
B
C
D
Manny goes bowling.
He has to spend.
He spends to rent shoes.
He spends for each game he bowls.
Which inequality can Manny use to determine , the greatest number of games
he can bowl?
A
B
C
D
21
22
Page 12GO ON
Session 1
A middle school principal wants to change the lunch menu at the school. The principal
surveys the students to determine how the students would feel about the changes.
Which survey method will produce the best representative sample?
A survey every fifth student who rides in a car to school
B survey 3 randomly selected students from every homeroom
C survey every tenth seventh-grade student during lunch
D survey 5 randomly selected students from every art, drama, and music class
Kerry has a bag containing white and yellow marbles. Kerry randomly selects one marble
from the bag, records the result, and returns the marble to the bag. The results of the
first 65 selections are shown below.
A white marble was selected 41 times.
A yellow marble was selected 24 times.
Based on these results, what is the probability that the next marble Kerry selects, rounded
to the nearest percent, will be white?
A 41%
B 50%
C 59%
D 63%
23
24
Page 13Session 1
GO ON
Which situation results in a final value of zero?
A the overall change in temperature when the temperature goes from to
B the total profit made when a person buys an item for and then sells the item
for
C the overall change in altitude of a hot air balloon after rising kilometers from
sea level
D the total distance a person travels when he bikes miles to school and then bikes
miles back home
An equation is shown below.
What value of makes the equation true?
A
B
C
D
25
26
Page 14Session 1
STOP

Grade 7
Mathematics Test
Session 1
v202
Question Type Key Points Standard Cluster Subscore Secondary Standard(s)
1 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.EE.B.4a Expressions and Equations Expressions and Equations
2 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.NS.A.2d The Number System The Number System
3 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.RP.A.3 Ratios and Proportional Relationships Ratios and Proportional Relationships
4 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.G.B.4 Geometry
5 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.RP.A.1 Ratios and Proportional Relationships Ratios and Proportional Relationships
6 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.NS.A.3 The Number System The Number System
7 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.RP.A.2b Ratios and Proportional Relationships Ratios and Proportional Relationships
8 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.NS.A.1a The Number System The Number System
9 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.EE.B.3 Expressions and Equations Expressions and Equations
10 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.RP.A.3 Ratios and Proportional Relationships Ratios and Proportional Relationships
11 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.EE.A.2 Expressions and Equations Expressions and Equations
12 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.NS.A.3 The Number System The Number System
13 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.RP.A.1 Ratios and Proportional Relationships Ratios and Proportional Relationships
14 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.RP.A.3 Ratios and Proportional Relationships Ratios and Proportional Relationships
15 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.RP.A.2a Ratios and Proportional Relationships Ratios and Proportional Relationships
16 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.EE.A.1 Expressions and Equations Expressions and Equations
17 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.SP.C.7b Statistics and Probability
18 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.EE.B.3 Expressions and Equations Expressions and Equations
19 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.SP.A.2 Statistics and Probability
20 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.G.A.1 Geometry
21 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.NS.A.1c The Number System The Number System
22 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.EE.B.4b Expressions and Equations Expressions and Equations
23 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.SP.A.1 Statistics and Probability
24 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.SP.C.6 Statistics and Probability
25 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.NS.A.1a The Number System The Number System
26 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.Math.Content.7.EE.B.3 Expressions and Equations Expressions and Equations
This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. However, some questions measure proficiencies described in multiple standards, including a
balanced combination of procedural and conceptual understanding.
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2021 Mathematics Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 7 Released Questions
Session 1