®
STAAR
State of Texas
Assessments of
Academic Readiness
GRADE 8
Reading
Administered May 2021
RELEASED
Copyright © 2021, Texas Education Agency. All rights reserved. Reproduction of all or portions of this work is prohibited without express
written permission from the Texas Education Agency.

READING
Reading
Page 3
Read the selection and choose the best answer to each question. Then fill in
the answer on your answer document.
A Lasting Impression
1 The first-day jitters were impossible to ignore as Lucy Falls walked through
the tall glass doors of her new school. Though she was excited for the
opportunity to study cinema at the School of the ARTS, she now wondered if she
had made a terrible mistake by transferring in the middle of the year. Trying to
shake off the early morning’s frustration, she wiped her clammy hands on her
navy sundress and focused her attention on finding her first-period class.
2 Finishing her paperwork had taken forever. The office aide had instructed
her to go back through the foyer and take the staircase on the right down to the
basement. Just as Lucy started walking, the bell for first period rang, sounding
to her like a signal of doom.
3 Great, she thought. Now not only am I new, I’ll be late too.
4 She marched quickly through the foyer and made it to the stairwell.
Distracted by a group of tardy students who had congregated at the top to take
selfies, Lucy tripped over her first step. She stumbled, fell, and then skidded all
the way to the bottom, purse and bag sliding down behind her.
5 “Smooth feet, newbie!”
6 “That’s gotta hurt!”
7 As she picked herself up, Lucy couldn’t decide what hurt more—her body or
her pride. She took a few deep breaths and realized she was now standing in
front of her first-period class. She worried that the longer she waited to get to
class, the worse this day would go. She needed a second chance to make a good
first impression.
8 Only like four people saw me fall, she told herself. No big deal.
9 First period went by uneventfully, and Lucy even introduced herself to a
couple of the girls who sat behind her. By the time she was headed to second
period, she had relegated the fall to the back of her mind.
10 She pushed open the door to Intro to Cinema, the class she was most
looking forward to at this new school. Students looked her way, and whispers
snaked from group to group. Lucy felt her face get hot, and she decided that
maybe this day actually could get worse. A couple of kids were huddled in the
back around one of the classroom laptops, and she assumed they were talking
about her.
11 How in the world had word gotten around so fast? As she stood awkwardly
facing the class, the mantra her mother had repeated since she was a little girl
came to mind. “Remember, honey. Lucy never falls,” her mother would say when
things didn’t go Lucy’s way.
Reading
Page 4
12 I bet Mom never imagined this scenario, Lucy mused, rolling her eyes.
13 “Settle down, class,” the teacher said sternly to the students, who quieted.
She directed her attention toward Lucy and gave her a welcoming smile. “You
must be Lucy Falls. Today we are discussing our 30-second film project. I
believe the details were in the outline you received before you transferred. You
can join group four. I’m sure whatever is so distracting on that laptop will be
gone by the time I make it over there,” she said, directing a pointed look to the
group at the back of the classroom.
14 Fearing the worst, Lucy approached the group.
15 “That fall was epic!” An enthusiastic redhead beamed at Lucy as she sat
down. Grinning widely he stuck his hand out and shook Lucy’s.
16 “I’m Rodney!”
17 The other group members, one looking intently at the laptop and the other
quickly jotting notes into a journal, ignored Lucy.
18 Lucy sighed. “I don’t know if that’s necessarily the right word to describe
it.” Rodney chuckled and shrugged his shoulders. “Someone was recording a
video of my friend, and it’s impossible to miss your wipeout in the background!”
19 The girl who was huddled over the laptop giggled. For the millionth time
that day, Lucy’s face got hot, and again she began to doubt the wisdom of
transferring to the magnet school altogether.
20 Rodney continued. “Hey, I hope you don’t think I’m making fun of you!
Actually, I think you’re going to save our 30-second film project! Your name has
perfect potential for a star character—Lucy Falls!” He gestured as if her name
were shining in lights. “The fact that you also fell, quite gracefully I might add,
makes it the perfect play on words! You’re going to be the inspiration for our
project!”
21 Lucy allowed herself a small smile. It hadn’t been a good start, but Rodney
was definitely making her first day less terrible.
22 “I’ve been working on some edits from this clip that we have,” the girl on
the laptop said suddenly, turning the computer toward Lucy and showing her
what she’d been working on so intently. “I’m Alicia—sorry—I wanted to capture
my thoughts before I forgot. We’ve been struggling to come up with a concept,
but this is sheer genius!”
23 As Alicia and Rodney talked excitedly, Lucy’s embarrassment began to
dissipate. She listened for a few moments, watching Alicia’s film clip transform
her stairway disaster into drama; then, she pulled up a chair and joined in as
the group brainstormed ideas for Lucy Falls.
24 Her mother’s mantra came to mind, and Lucy smiled to herself. Well, Mom,
sometimes Lucy DOES fall . . . but at least she makes a lasting impression!
Reading
Page 5
1 How is Lucy’s behavior in paragraph 23 important to the resolution of her conflict?
A It shows Lucy’s shift in focus from herself to the project.
B It signals a change in the other students’ treatment of Lucy.
C It suggests that Lucy will become close friends with members of her group.
D It shows that the other students have more experience than Lucy in creating a film.
2 In paragraph 20, what does the word potential mean?
F A specific plan
G An unexpected outcome
H An existing possibility
J A strange situation
3 Read paragraph 21.
Lucy allowed herself a small smile. It hadn’t
been a good start, but Rodney was definitely
making her first day less terrible.
What does this paragraph reveal about Lucy at this point in the selection?
A She is unsure about Rodney’s motivation for speaking to her.
B She knows she is more critical of herself than anyone else is.
C She is beginning to feel accepted at her new school.
D She thinks Rodney will introduce her to new people.
Reading
Page 6
4 Why are the events in paragraphs 1 and 2 important to the plot?
F The events reveal Lucy’s regrets about registering at a new school.
G The events explain Lucy’s reasons for not liking her new school.
H The events hint at Lucy’s confusion as she walks to her first-period class.
J The events set the conditions for Lucy’s attitude as the school day begins.
5 What does the use of the third-person limited point of view allow the author to emphasize?
A Lucy’s feelings about what takes place when she transfers to a new school
B The other students’ reactions when Lucy falls down the stairs
C Rodney’s initial impression of Lucy when he watches the video of her fall
D The cinema teacher’s thoughts about Lucy’s midyear transfer
6 What is the best summary of this selection?
F Lucy tries to forget the bad start to her first day at a new school by telling herself only a
few people saw her fall down the stairs. However, when students begin whispering in
Lucy’s cinema class, she fears the worst. Lucy is assigned to a group and is welcomed by
one of the members, but the other members of the group do not acknowledge her.
G Lucy is reminded of her mother’s encouraging words after her first day at ARTS Magnet
School. Already late to class, Lucy falls down the stairs but is not hurt. In second period
students stare at Lucy when she enters the room. Then a member of Lucy’s group tells her
that a student has recorded video of her fall and that he thinks she fell gracefully.
H Lucy has trouble finding her first-period class after the office staff takes a long time
completing her new-student paperwork, but she meets some girls who sit behind her in
class. In her cinema class, Lucy is welcomed into a group working on a 30-second film
project and shares some ideas she has with her group.
J Lucy falls down the stairs on the first day at her new school. Her cinema class begins
awkwardly, but one member of Lucy’s assigned group welcomes her. He explains that the
group will use the video of her fall in its class film project. Lucy becomes more at ease as
members of her group encourage her involvement in its class project.
Reading
Page 7
7 A major turning point occurs in the selection when Lucy —
A wonders if she should have stayed at her old school
B enters her first-period class for the first time
C is greeted by a classmate during second period
D is ignored by a classmate in her group
8 Based on Lucy’s interactions with her classmates, which statement best expresses the major
theme explored in this selection?
F Achieving academic success requires hard work and commitment.
G Goals are easier to achieve when working with others.
H Adjusting to new situations may take a long period of time.
J Negative experiences can sometimes have positive outcomes.
Reading
Page 8
Read the next two selections. Then choose the best answer to each
question.
A Ghostly New Creature
by Jennifer Marino Walters
1 In February, scientists exploring the Pacific Ocean
near Hawaii made an amazing discovery. They had
sent a remotely operated vehicle thousands of feet
below the waves to take video of the deep sea.
Dozens of team members were watching the live
video feed from a ship on the ocean’s surface and
from offices on land. Suddenly, a mysterious
creature appeared on their screens. It was a white,
ghostlike octopod. That’s a category of eight-armed
ocean animals that includes the common octopus.
But it did not look like any octopod the scientists
had seen before.
2 “I was really excited because I recognized it was something unusual,” says
zoologist Michael Vecchione.
3 Vecchione and the other scientists work for the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The government agency was working on a
project to map the ocean floor near Hawaii and study the ocean life there. The
new octopod was an exciting—and unexpected—find.
Ghost octopod
found here
Pacific
Ocean
Hawaii
Necker
Island
The Rare Octopod, a Cousin to the Common Octopus
Public Domain
A Unique Species
4 The newly discovered octopod has tiny eyes and a jelly-like body. It has very
few muscles. That’s because there is little food in the deep sea, and a lot of food
is needed to build muscle. The creature also has some unusual characteristics
that set it apart from other octopods. “The first thing that makes it really
unusual is that it doesn’t have any chromatophores, or pigment cells,” Vecchione
Reading
Page 9
told Scholastic Online. Pigment is what gives animals color. Because this
creature has no pigment, it is very pale. It also has fewer rows of suckers on its
arms than other octopods do. Suckers are body parts that octopods use to grasp
objects. Those two characteristics lead scientists to believe that it is a
completely new octopod species.
5 The creature is also a record setter. It was spotted at about 14,000 feet—or
2.6 miles—beneath the waves. Some other types of octopods are known to live
that deep in the ocean, but they all have fins on the sides of their bodies. The
new creature belongs to a category of octopods that do not have fins. Until this
discovery, no finless octopod had been found below about 13,000 feet.
More to Discover
6 Because of the octopod’s ghostlike appearance, it has been given the nickname
Casper. (Casper the Friendly Ghost was a popular character in an old cartoon.)
But it cannot be officially named until scientists get a specimen to examine more
closely. Unfortunately, that’s not likely to happen anytime soon.
7 “The likelihood of encountering another one of these octopods is very small,”
Vecchione says. “So it wouldn’t be a very productive use of our time and
resources to try to look for one.”
8 Still, the octopod’s discovery is exciting because it suggests that many more
undiscovered species could live in the deep sea and other places on Earth. “It
illustrates how little we know about life on our planet—and how much more we
can find,” Vecchione says.
From Scholastic News, 6/16/16. Copyright © 2016 by Scholastic, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Scholastic Inc.
Third party trademarks NOAA® and Scholastic® were used in these testing materials.
Reading
Page 10
Tiptoeing Scientists
1 Peering through the thick, white mist, Marcio Pie crouches among the gnarled
vines. The shuffles, calls, and chirps of countless animals, birds, and insects fill
the cool evening air. Pie is listening hard for the singing of tiny frogs. He and his
team have tiptoed to the location where they last heard them singing. The
scientists quietly begin picking up handfuls of leaves and screening them. If the
scientists are lucky, they will find one of the frogs. But they must look very
carefully because these frogs are smaller than a fingernail.
2 Pie is one of a handful of scientists who has discovered a new tiny frog species.
These little creatures make their home in the cloud forests high in the
mountains of Brazil. They are brightly colored with poisonous skin that protects
them, and they live in “leaf litter,” or piles of dead leaves.
A Newly Discovered Frog
Used with permission.
3 Locating the frogs is extremely difficult. “Sometimes it’s very frustrating,” says
Pie. “You can hear them singing, and there’s probably hundreds of them, but
you simply can’t catch them!” The frogs detect the vibrations that occur when
people walk. Suddenly they become silent, staying that way for about half an
hour, forcing scientists to forage through the leaves.
Reading
Page 11
This tiny frog measures approximately 7 millimeters.
© iredding01 / Adobe Stock
4 In Papua, New Guinea, scientist C. I. Moore also recently discovered a miniature
frog. At only about 6.858 millimeters, it may be even smaller than the ones Pie
found. This frog’s brownish-green hue provides excellent camouflage. Moore first
discovered the frog by its unique call. His team began picking up leaf litter and
putting it in plastic bags until they caught sight of the new frogs. The tiny
amphibians were incredibly difficult to catch because they jump like crickets.
5 In spite of the countless challenges, new tiny frogs are being found among the
planet’s habitats that have previously been understudied. “That’s what’s exciting
about this field,” declares Moore. “You know that new species such as these are
going to continue to be discovered.”
Reading
Page 12
Use “A Ghostly New Creature” (pp. 9–10) to answer questions 9–13. Then
fill in the answers on your answer document.
9 Based on paragraphs 4 and 5 of the selection “A Ghostly New Creature,” what can be
concluded about the study of newly discovered animals?
A Identifying a new species requires careful analysis of an animal.
B Scientists are searching constantly for unknown types of animals.
C Studying ocean animals is easier than studying land animals.
D Most animal research is conducted by government agencies.
10 In the selection “A Ghostly New Creature,” the author includes the photograph of the octopod
most likely to help the reader better understand —
F why the octopod lives so deep in the ocean
G how far the octopod can move without having fins
H why scientists named the octopod after a cartoon character
J how the octopod uses its suckers to grasp objects
Reading
Page 13
11 What is the best summary of the selection “A Ghostly New Creature”?
A Government scientists were sent to Hawaii to study animal life in the Pacific Ocean. They
watched video that was taken by an underwater vehicle. Watching the video from a ship
and from land, they saw a ghostlike octopod. The scientists named the mysterious new
specimen Casper after Casper the Friendly Ghost, an old cartoon character.
B Near Hawaii a research team studied the Pacific Ocean thousands of feet below the
surface. The team members became excited when they saw a white octopod appear on
their video. They had not expected to see this finless animal as it was found below
13,000 feet where there is little food to support its existence.
C Scientists made an exciting find in the waters near Hawaii. While mapping the ocean floor
to study ocean life, scientists saw a mysterious octopod. It was so unusual that scientists
decided they had discovered a new species. The octopod that scientists found was unique,
suggesting there are still undiscovered species located in other parts of the world.
D Dozens of researchers observed a white octopod in the ocean near Hawaii. Octopods are a
category of eight-armed animals that include the octopus. The researchers used an
underwater vehicle as part of their studies and were surprised to see the unusual creature.
Scientists doubt that they will be able to examine a specimen of this new type of octopod.
12 In the selection “A Ghostly New Creature,” which idea about the octopod best explains why
the author includes the map?
F Octopods are found in many oceans throughout the world.
G The ghostly octopod is common only to the ocean area around Hawaii.
H Octopods are most commonly found near islands.
J The ghostly octopod was found near the Hawaiian Islands.
13 What can the reader conclude from Michael Vecchione’s comments throughout the selection
“A Ghostly New Creature”?
A Vecchione is not interested in learning more about the new octopod.
B Vecchione is fascinated by the discovery of new species.
C Vecchione was the coordinator of the project that discovered the unknown creature.
D Vecchione was first to understand the significance of finding the new octopod.
Reading
Page 14
Use “Tiptoeing Scientists” (pp. 11–12) to answer questions 14–17. Then fill
in the answers on your answer document.
14 Read the dictionary entry for the word screen.
screen \'skrēn\ v
1. to give shelter to 2. to guard
from injury 3. to examine for a
particular purpose 4. to shield from
view
Which definition best matches the way the word screening is used in paragraph 1 of the
selection “Tiptoeing Scientists”?
F Definition 1
G Definition 2
H Definition 3
J Definition 4
15 Throughout the selection “Tiptoeing Scientists,” which idea about tiny frogs does the author
highlight?
A Scientists are finding tiny frogs throughout the mountain ranges of the world.
B Researchers locate tiny frogs by their bold and unique coloring.
C Tiny frogs can be very difficult for scientists to capture.
D Tiny frogs have poisonous skin that helps to protect them.
Reading
Page 15
16 Based on information in the selection “Tiptoeing Scientists,” what can the reader conclude
about the Brazilian frogs?
F They make their homes in the treetops.
G Their bright color makes them easy to locate among the leaves.
H Most of their diet consists of dead leaves.
J They have adaptations that help keep them from danger.
17 For what reason does the author include the photograph after paragraph 3 of the selection
“Tiptoeing Scientists”?
A To prove that this species is the smallest of all frogs ever discovered
B To highlight the effectiveness of the frog’s natural camouflage
C To emphasize how small the frog is by comparing it to a familiar object
D To demonstrate that the frog has a unique call
Reading
Page 16
Use “A Ghostly New Creature” and “Tiptoeing Scientists” to answer
questions 18–22. Then fill in the answers on your answer document.
18 In the selections “A Ghostly New Creature” and “Tiptoeing Scientists,” how are Michael
Vecchione’s work and Marcio Pie’s work different?
F Vecchione uses high-tech equipment to observe animals, but Pie does not.
G Vecchione studies animals that can be difficult to find, but Pie does not.
H Pie is employed by a government agency, but Vecchione is self-employed.
J Pie conducts research about many kinds of animals, but Vecchione studies only octopods.
19 One similarity between the scientists in the selections “A Ghostly New Creature” and
“Tiptoeing Scientists” is that they both —
A study animals that live in the oceans
B learn about animals from the sounds they make
C perform their work in isolated areas
D capture the animal they each study
20 In what way is scientist C. I. Moore from the selection “Tiptoeing Scientists” unlike Michael
Vecchione from the selection “A Ghostly New Creature”?
F Moore studies animals in their natural habitats.
G Moore will likely have an opportunity to observe a newly discovered animal more than
once.
H Moore is dedicated to finding new animal species in new locations.
J Moore researches animals that are commonly found throughout the world.
Reading
Page 17
21 Read this sentence from paragraph 8 of the selection “A Ghostly New Creature.”
Still, the octopod’s discovery is exciting
because it suggests that many more
undiscovered species could live in the deep sea
and other places on Earth.
Which sentence from the selection “Tiptoeing Scientists” is related to this idea?
A He and his team have tiptoed to the location where they last heard them singing.
(paragraph 1)
B But they must look very carefully because these frogs are smaller than a fingernail.
(paragraph 1)
C The tiny amphibians were incredibly difficult to catch because they jump like crickets.
(paragraph 4)
D In spite of the countless challenges, new tiny frogs are being found among the planet’s
habitats that have previously been understudied. (paragraph 5)
22 How do the frogs in the selection “Tiptoeing Scientists” differ from the octopod in the
selection “A Ghostly New Creature”?
F The frogs’ bodies have coloration that protects the frogs.
The octopod’s body does not have coloration for protection.
G The frogs are found on islands in the Pacific Ocean near Hawaii.
The octopod was sighted off the coast of Brazil in South America.
H The frogs’ size is typical for its species.
The octopod’s size is smaller than normal.
J The frogs are well adapted to their environment.
The octopod has not adapted to its environment.
Reading
Page 18
Read the selection and choose the best answer to each question. Then fill in
the answer on your answer document.
In this poem, Margarita Engle writes about her experience growing up in
Los Angeles, California. She prefers the summers that she spent on the island of
Cuba, her mother’s homeland.
Escape
by Margarita Engle
5
Living in between two ways
of speaking
and hearing
makes me feel as divided
as the gaps between
languages.
10
At least we’re finally
on our way to the farm,
where there will be more animals
than people, and I won’t have to struggle
to understand
old folks.
15
As we bump along a muddy track
in Tío1 Darío’s battered jeep, I inhale
the scent of roadside flowers
that grow tall and weedy,
rooted in mud
the color of blood.
20
Red soil.
Green hills.
White cows.
Horses of so many shades
that the colors can’t be
counted.
25 Everything looks just as wild and free
as I’ve half-remembered
and half-imagined.
1Tío means uncle.
Reading
Page 19
It’s as if my other self has been here
all along—
30 the invisible twin
who never left this island
and never
will.
From Enchanted Air by Margarita Engle. Text copyright © 2015 by Margarita Engle. Reprinted with the permission of
Atheneum Books for Young Readers, an imprint of Simon & Schuster Children’s Publishing Division. All rights reserved.
Third party trademark JEEP® was used in these testing materials.
Reading
Page 20
23 In stanza 2 (lines 7–12), the reader can tell that the speaker feels —
A irritated that she does not have better communication skills for the experiences she has
B concerned that she must continue to talk with people who speak different languages
C confident that she will not feel separated from those in her family who speak a different
language
D relieved that she is going to a familiar place where there will be less conflict
24 The simile in stanza 1 (lines 1–6) helps show that the speaker —
F wants to learn different languages in order to communicate with others
G feels torn between two different worlds that have little in common
H wants to go home again and not have to speak or listen to anyone
J feels annoyed by having to spend so much time listening to others
25 What message does the poet hope to convey in the poem?
A A person’s memories become more significant as one grows older.
B Moving to a new place offers a person important and unique opportunities.
C The best way to remember a person is to visit the place where that person was born.
D A person’s sense of identity is often linked to a meaningful location in one’s past.
26 Which lines from the poem best identify the source of the speaker’s conflict?
F Living in between two ways/of speaking/and hearing (lines 1–3)
G At least we’re finally/on our way to the farm, (lines 7–8)
H Horses of so many shades/that the colors can’t be/counted. (lines 22–24)
J Everything looks just as wild and free/as I’ve half-remembered (lines 25–26)
Reading
Page 21
27 What is the effect of the two-word sentences in lines 19 through 21?
A The sentences emphasize the distinct contrasts found on the farm.
B The sentences highlight the speaker’s memories of the farm from previous visits.
C The sentences detail how spacious the farm actually is.
D The sentences reveal the types of animals the speaker sees on the farm.
28 Read stanza 6 (lines 28–33).
It’s as if my other self has been here
all along—
the invisible twin
who never left this island
and never
will.
What is the poet suggesting by referring to the speaker’s “invisible twin”?
F The speaker has a sister living on the island whom she is looking forward to seeing.
G The speaker feels a bond with the land, and she believes it will always be her homeland.
H The speaker feels lonely on the island, and she wishes her family were there to share the
experience with her.
J The speaker looks forward to spending time with close friends while she visits her
homeland.
Reading
Page 22
Read the selection and choose the best answer to each question. Then fill in
the answer on your answer document.
Edible Forests Are Sprouting Up
Across America
by Jodi Helmer
1 Carol LeResche got the phone call she’d been waiting for. She lives in Sheridan,
Wyoming, and was told a resident was picking zucchini at Thorne-Rider Park.
2 “It’s exactly what we hoped would happen when we put in the food forest,”
explained LeResche. She is the park’s food forest coordinator.
3 In May, the Powder River Basin Resource Council in Sheridan received a $3,500
grant from the Wyoming Department of Agriculture. The money was used to
help turn a former BMX park into an edible landscape. It’s a place where all of
the fruits, vegetables and nuts are free for the taking.
4 Unlike some parks with strict “no picking” policies, or parks where foraging is
permitted but plantings emphasize aesthetics over edibles and just a fraction of
the species can be consumed, food forests are designed to provide bountiful
crops. Residents are encouraged to harvest them. And although there are no
solid statistics on the number of food forests, the concept appears to be taking
root.
5 At Thorne-Rider Park, zucchini was the first vegetable to ripen in the brand new
food forest. As the other edibles mature, LeResche hopes residents will dig up
potatoes for supper. They can gather raspberries to make jam or snack on ripe
figs plucked straight from the trees.
6 “We think it’s important to put public food in public spaces,” she said.
7 Food forests may seem like a spin-off of community gardens. But there are
distinct differences. Residents often have to pay to rent plots in community
gardens. They must invest in the seeds. They also must devote the labor
required to maintain their plots. In contrast, food forests are funded through
grants. Until the forests are self-sustaining, volunteers handle the labor. All that
residents have to do is show up and pick their fill.
8 Food forests also provide different kinds of fresh produce than community
gardens. The food forests emphasize perennials like fruit and nut trees and
berry bushes over annual vegetables.
9 They also provide essential forest canopy that is lacking in urban areas. The
canopy helps to minimize the heat island effect. It also provides community
gathering spaces. Residents can participate in tours and classes. Or they can
just relax among the fruit trees.
Reading
Page 23
10 “Our desire to be more connected to where our food comes from is one of the
reasons there is a real trend toward integrating agriculture into neighborhoods
and communities,” explained Daron “Farmer D” Joffe. He is the founding director
of Coastal Roots Farm. The farm is a nonprofit. It manages an eight-acre food
forest. It is in Encinitas, California.
11 Asheville, North Carolina, is believed to be home to the first food forest. Forty
varieties of fruit and nut trees are found in the city’s George Washington Carver
Edible Park. It was founded in 1997. More than a decade later, similar projects
began to sprout up. They can be found in cities like Portland, Oregon, San
Francisco and Seattle.
12 Most food forests are similar in approach. They bring together parks and
recreation districts (which provide land), nonprofit groups and volunteers who
handle the labor and maintenance. The designs are similar, too.
13 Food forests are based on permaculture design. It’s a model that emphasizes
sustainable and mostly self-sufficient agricultural production. To achieve this,
most food forests incorporate stacked layers of edible plants from root crops,
ground cover, vines and herbs to shrubs and trees. From the ground up, the
edibles might include beets, strawberries, grapes, basil, blueberries, fruit and
nut trees.
14 The food forest model is less labor intensive than conventional agriculture. An
edible forest is similar to a hardwood forest. There is no rotating of crops,
weeding or mowing.
15 Coastal Roots Farm has built food access into its mission for the food forest. The
eight-acre forest was planted this spring. When the harvest is ready, a portion
will be donated to food-insecure communities through food banks. The rest will
be available for public harvesting.
Coastal Roots Farm is home to a food
forest in Encinitas, California.
Coastal Roots Farm/Sterling College/
Flickr/CC BY
16 But critics warn that these edible landscapes could be problematic. The concept
is relatively new. And it takes at least three years for fruit and nut trees and
berry bushes to start producing meaningful amounts of fresh food. This makes it
difficult to know whether food forests will have an impact on food deserts.
17 Volunteer-driven projects can fall apart if the group lacks cohesion or loses
interest. Lack of funding can also be problematic. In Sheridan, the original
$3,500 grant helped start the project. LeResche estimated it will take $50,000
to complete the food forest plan.
Reading
Page 24
18 Pests are an oft-cited concern, too.
19 “All trees need maintenance and fruit trees are no different,” Joffe admitted. “If
a food forest is well managed, there is no issue.”
20 After all, LeResche explained, food forests are about a lot more than food. “We
also want to provide a community gathering space that is productive and
beautiful where people can cultivate a relationship with the land. And get
connected to delicious, healthy produce.”
Copyright 2016 Smithsonian Institution. Reprinted with permission from Smithsonian Enterprises. All rights reserved.
Reproduction in any medium is strictly prohibited without permission from Smithsonian Institution.
Third party trademark Coastal Roots Farm® was used in these testing materials.
Reading
Page 25
29 What is the most likely reason the author includes the information in paragraphs 16 through
19?
A To show that the majority of food forests are unsuccessful due to damage from pests
B To highlight that food forest projects are often fully funded with grants from the
government
C To emphasize that even though they are self-sustaining, food forests must be managed
well to be successful
D To suggest that because it takes so long for crops to grow, food forests are not a realistic
option for most communities
30 What is the most likely reason the author includes paragraphs 12 through 14?
F To explain the food forest concept and design model
G To encourage nonprofit groups to seek assistance from volunteers
H To highlight existing food forests that have been successful
J To describe how to maximize sustainable agricultural production
31 What is the best summary of the selection?
A Food forests are self-sustaining gardens that produce various fruits and vegetables. These
public areas, which can be found in several cities across the country, are similar to
community gardens but offer additional benefits to local residents. Two such food forests
are Thorne-Rider Park in Wyoming and Coastal Roots Farm in California.
B Food forests are not a new concept, and many cities have taken advantage of these edible
landscapes. However, critics warn that there are many drawbacks that should be
considered, such as issues with funding, labor, and pests.
C The first food forest was founded in Asheville, North Carolina, in 1997. Since then,
organizations across the country have taken note of the permaculture design and have
implemented it into similar projects such as Coastal Roots Farm in Encinitas, California,
and Thorne-Rider Park in Sheridan, Wyoming.
D Carol LeResche is a food forest coordinator who enjoys creating edible gardens so that
local residents can have access to free vegetables such as zucchini and potatoes. She
received a grant to begin a food forest at Thorne-Rider Park in Sheridan, Wyoming.
Reading
Page 26
32 Based on paragraphs 7 through 9, why might people assume that food forests are a “spin-off”
of community gardens?
F They both feature crops that do not need much maintenance over time.
G They both provide crops that are shared with local food banks.
H They both offer residents public areas to harvest food.
J They both require residents to make a monetary investment.
33 Which idea does the author highlight throughout the selection?
A People prefer food forests over community gardens.
B Food forests are a valuable asset to communities around the country.
C Some food forests emphasize the plants’ beauty over their practical use.
D Residents are required to maintain food forests in order to gather food from them.
34 What is the most likely reason the author wrote this selection?
F To describe a unique way that people can get involved in their communities
G To convince community leaders to establish food forests
H To detail an alternative agricultural practice that is becoming more popular
J To expose flaws in the implementation of food forests
Reading
Page 27
35 Read this sentence from paragraph 6.
“We think it’s important to put public food in
public spaces,” she said.
What does this sentence help the reader to understand?
A The main reason the food forest in Thorne-Rider Park was started
B The high level of interest communities have in starting food forests
C The concerns raised by critics about starting a food forest at Thorne-Rider Park
D The motivation behind the rules that govern community gardens
36 In paragraphs 7 and 8, what is the most likely reason the author contrasts food forests with
community gardens?
F To reveal problems caused by the amount of time it takes for community gardens to
produce crops
G To give reasons why food forests include more perennials than community gardens
H To note objections to charging residents for use of plots in community gardens
J To highlight distinctions in costs, labor, and plants between food forests and community
gardens
37 The author develops the thesis of the selection mainly by —
A alternating both descriptions and specific examples of food forests with more general
information about the reasons behind creating edible forests
B describing a typical day of the food forest coordinator and then explaining how edible
forests are primarily funded
C providing a general overview of where edible forests are located and then describing why
it is important to have volunteers who are knowledgeable about the care of plants
D listing the requirements residents must meet before foraging in the edible forests and then
offering specific examples as to where most edible forests are located
Reading
Page 28
Read the selection and choose the best answer to each question. Then fill in
the answer on your answer document.
Playing Second Fiddle
Characters
ALYSSA: An eighth grader
SAMANTHA: An eighth grader
SAMANTHA’S MOM
EIGHTH-GRADE STUDENT
SCENE 1
1 [Alyssa’s bedroom. Sheet music is strewn across the bed and a violin case rests
in the corner.]
2 ALYSSA: [Excitedly.] It’s almost time for the first day of school, and you know
what that means . . . ORCHESTRA! I can’t wait. We’re going to be so good this
year; we’ll probably win all the competitions. [Looking puzzled.] Why aren’t you
saying anything, Sam?
3 SAMANTHA: [Looking down.] I don’t know, Alyssa. . . .
4 ALYSSA: What’s there to know? You’re first violin—you’re the king of the hill!
You’ll be great as usual. What don’t you know?
5 SAMANTHA: [Avoiding her gaze.] I just don’t know, Alyssa. I might try
something new this year.
6 ALYSSA: [Perplexed.] Something new? What? You’re first violin. Orchestra for
life—that’s our motto!
7 SAMANTHA: [Sheepishly.] Maybe it’s time for you to be first violin.
8 ALYSSA: No way; I’m second violin, and I’m OK with that. I’ll never be as good
as you are.
9 SAMANTHA: [Quietly.] If you say so.
10 ALYSSA: I do say so. Come on, let’s look at our new music.
11 [Curtain closes.]
SCENE 2
12 [Curtain opens to a living room. Samantha’s Mom sits on a couch. Sound of a
door opening and closing. Samantha enters from stage right.]
13 SAMANTHA’S MOM: [Standing up to greet Samantha.] Hey, Sam, how’s
everything? Did you tell Alyssa that you plan on taking a break from orchestra?
Is she OK? Are you OK?
Reading
Page 29
14 SAMANTHA: [Flustered.] Mom, I really tried, but Alyssa just wouldn’t listen.
She’s convinced that I’ll still be in orchestra with her. Orchestra is everything to
her, but I just want to try something different. I mean . . . this is our last year of
middle school, and I want to explore other classes I could take.
15 SAMANTHA’S MOM: It’s not going to be easy for either one of you, Sam.
Alyssa has always been a good friend to you. But you can’t let her make your
decisions for you. This is what growing up is about—making your own decisions
and living with the consequences. Just follow your heart, and Alyssa will come
around.
16 SAMANTHA: [Unconvinced.] I suppose you’re right. But what if . . .
17 SAMANTHA’S MOM: Will you be happy if you wait until later to wonder, “What
if?” Honey, this is all you’ve talked about all summer. It seems to me that this is
what you want. I support you, Sam, but ultimately it’s your choice. No one can
or should make it for you.
18 SAMANTHA: [Taking a deep breath.] It’s my choice. And I’ve made my
decision.
19 [Curtain closes.]
SCENE 3
20 [Curtain opens to a hallway outside a noisy classroom where students sit at
desks, typing and writing. Copies of the school newspaper are displayed on the
bulletin boards. Samantha is in the hallway talking to another student. Alyssa
enters from stage right carrying her violin. Samantha sees her and runs up to
her.]
21 SAMANTHA: Alyssa, wait up!
22 ALYSSA: [Sarcastically.] Wow, Sam, I’m surprised you have time to leave your
desk. The school newspaper seems to be consuming all your time.
23 SAMANTHA: Come on, Alyssa. Don’t be mad. Orchestra is a year-round
commitment, and I really wanted to try writing for the newspaper. Besides, don’t
you like being first violin?
24 ALYSSA: You think that I’m first violin? Well, I’m not. I’m still second violin.
Newspaper is first violin.
25 SAMANTHA: [Baffled.] What do you mean?
26 ALYSSA: [Sighing.] Yes, I’m first violin in orchestra, but I’m not first violin to
you. I’m still playing second fiddle, while you’re busy working on the newspaper.
27 SAMANTHA: Alyssa, you’re my best friend and always will be, but I had to do
this for me. Listen, I’ve got a mandatory deadline to make, but check out the
newspaper tomorrow. I think you might like what you see!
28 [Alyssa and Samantha walk offstage in different directions. Curtain closes.]
Reading
Page 30
SCENE 4
29 [The next day after school. The curtain opens to a science lab. Alyssa is sitting
on a stool reading the school paper and smiling.]
30 EIGHTH-GRADE STUDENT: [To Alyssa.] Congrats on first violin, Alyssa! Way
to move up in the world!
31 ALYSSA: Thanks!
32 SAMANTHA: [Enters the science lab and approaches Alyssa timidly.] Well . . .
what do you think?
33 ALYSSA: I don’t know what to say, Sam. I can’t believe that I’m the topic of
your first feature article! I’m sorry for being such a jerk. You’re a really good
writer.
34 SAMANTHA: [Smiles and hugs Alyssa.] No worries. By the way, I’ve been
looking everywhere for you. Why are you in here instead of in the orchestra
room?
35 ALYSSA: [Stepping back and smiling.] I needed to find something to do to
keep my mind off of missing you too much, so I decided to give robotics a try. I
know what you’re thinking: Me? Robotics? But, yeah, I really like it, and I have
you to thank. You let me know that it’s OK to try new things.
36 SAMANTHA: Awesome! I was looking for my next topic, and now I have it:
robots!
37 [Curtain closes.]
Reading
Page 31
38 What does the word ultimately mean in line 17?
F All of a sudden
G With care
H For the most part
J In the end
39 Read line 26.
ALYSSA: [Sighing.] Yes, I’m first violin in
orchestra, but I’m not first violin to you. I’m
still playing second fiddle, while you’re busy
working on the newspaper.
The playwright uses figurative language in these sentences to show that Alyssa —
A wants Samantha to realize that Samantha is abandoning the orchestra
B believes that Samantha has chosen the newspaper over their friendship
C worries that Samantha is writing for the newspaper because she doubts her musical
talents
D thinks Samantha will miss playing the violin while writing for the newspaper
40 Scene 2 is important to the play because it foreshadows that Samantha —
F has never truly enjoyed being in orchestra with Alyssa
G wants to write a newspaper article about Alyssa
H wants to have friends other than Alyssa
J is determined to be honest with Alyssa
Reading
Page 32
41 What is the best summary of scene 2?
A Samantha’s mom is in the living room when Samantha enters, and she immediately asks
Samantha if she has told Alyssa about her decision to join the newspaper.
B Samantha comes home from school and begins to tell her mom about her decision to quit
orchestra, and Samantha’s mom tells her daughter she must live with the results of her
decision.
C Samantha and her mother discuss Samantha’s conversation with Alyssa, and then
Samantha makes a decision to take a break from orchestra.
D Samantha’s mom is waiting when Samantha returns home from seeing Alyssa, and
Samantha says she wants to explore new options in middle school.
42 The playwright shows that Alyssa has matured by revealing Alyssa’s —
F decision to try robotics
G reluctance to talk to Samantha in the hallway
H excitement about continuing with orchestra
J acceptance that Samantha is a talented violinist
Reading
Page 33
43 What inference can the reader make based on the events that take place in scene 4?
A Both girls will try to participate in each other’s new interests.
B Alyssa will eventually quit the orchestra to pursue her interest in robotics.
C Both girls will enjoy their own activities while still remaining friends.
D Samantha will ask to participate in the orchestra’s upcoming competitions.
44 Read Alyssa’s dialogue from line 4.
You’re first violin—you’re the king of the hill!
What does the playwright suggest about Samantha through the metaphor in this dialogue?
F Samantha has played with the orchestra longer than any other student has.
G Samantha has proved herself to be the most talented violinist in the orchestra.
H Samantha practices more than the other violinists in the orchestra.
J Samantha is envied by many of the other orchestra players.
BE SURE YOU HAVE RECORDED ALL OF YOUR ANSWERS
Reading
Page 34 ON THE ANSWER DOCUMENT. STOP





STAAR
GRADE 8
Reading
May 2021