New York State administered the English Language Arts Tests
in March 2022 and is now making approximately 75% of the
questions from these tests available for review and use.
New York State Testing Program
Grade 8
English Language Arts Test
Released Questions
2022
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program
Grades 3–8 English Language Arts
Released Questions from 2022 Exams
Background
As in past years, the State Education Department (SED) is releasing large portions of the 2022 NYS
Grades 3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics test materials for review, discussion, and use.
For 2022, included in these released materials are at least 75 percent of the test questions that appeared on
the 2022 tests (including all constructed-response questions) that counted toward students’ scores.
Additionally, SED is providing information about the released passages; the associated text complexity for each
passage; and a map that details what learning standards each released question measures and the correct
response to each question. These released materials will help students, families, educators, and the public better
understand the tests and the New York State Education Department’s expectations for students.
Understanding ELA Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P–12 Learning Standards in English
Language Arts. These questions ask students to analyze different aspects of a given text, including central idea,
style elements, character and plot development, and vocabulary. Almost all questions, including vocabulary
questions, will be answered correctly only if the student comprehends and makes use of the whole passage.
Short-Response Questions
Short-response questions are designed to assess New York State P–12 Reading and Language Standards.
These are single questions in which a student uses textual evidence to support their answer to an
inferential question. These questions ask the student to make an inference (a claim, position, or conclusion)
based on their analysis of the passage, and then provide two pieces of text-based evidence to support their
answer.
The purpose of the short-response questions is to assess a student’s ability to comprehend and analyze text.
In responding to these questions, students are expected to write in complete sentences. Responses require no
more than three complete sentences. The rubric used for evaluating short-response questions can be found in
the grade-level Educator Guides at http://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/grades-3-8-ela-and-math-test-
manuals.
Extended-Response Questions
Extended-response questions are designed to measure a student’s ability to write from sources. Questions that
measure Writing from Sources prompt students to communicate a clear and coherent analysis of one or two
texts. The comprehension and analysis required by each extended response is directly related to grade-
specific reading standards. Student responses are evaluated on the degree to which they meet grade-level writing
and language expectations. This evaluation is made by using a rubric that incorporates demands of grade-
specific New York State P–12 Reading and Language standards.
The integrated nature of the standards for ELA and literacy requires that students are evaluated across the
strands (Reading, Writing, and Language) with longer pieces of writing, such as those prompted by the
extended-response questions. The rubric used for evaluating extended-response questions can be found in the
grade-level Educator Guides at http://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/grades-3-8-ela-and-math-test-
manuals.
New York State P–12 Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment to the New York State P–12 Learning Standards for English Language Arts is intended to identify
the analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. However, some questions measure
proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards.
For example, two-point and four-point constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the
analyses described in the mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on
writing standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions,
please refer to the rubrics.
These Released Questions Do Not Comprise a “Mini Test”
To ensure it is possible to develop future tests, some content must remain secure. This document is not
intended to be representative of the entire test, to show how operational tests look, or to provide
information about how teachers should administer the test; rather, its purpose is to provide an overview of how
the test reflects the demands of the New York State P–12 Learning Standards.
The released questions do not represent the full spectrum of the standards assessed on the State tests, nor do
they represent the full spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in the classroom. It
should not be assumed that a particular standard will be measured by an identical question in future
assessments.
2022 Grade 8 ELA Test Text Complexity Metrics for
Released Questions
Selecting high-quality, grade-appropriate passages requires both objective text
complexity metrics and expert judgment. For the Grades 3–8 assessments based on the
New York State P-12 Learning Standards for English Language Arts, both quantitative
and qualitative rubrics are used to determine the complexity of the texts and their
appropriate placement within a grade-level ELA exam.
Quantitative measures of text complexity are used to measure aspects of text
complexity that are difficult for a human reader to evaluate when examining a text.
These aspects include word frequency, word length, sentence length, and text cohesion.
These aspects are efficiently measured by computer programs. While quantitative text
complexity metrics are a helpful start, they are not definitive.
Qualitative measures are a crucial complement to quantitative measures. Using
qualitative measures of text complexity involves making an informed decision about the
difficulty of a text in terms of one or more factors discernible to a human reader
applying trained judgment to the task. To qualitatively determine the complexity of a
text, educators use a rubric composed of five factors; four of these factors are required
and one factor is optional. The required criteria are: meaning, text structure, language
features, and knowledge demands. The optional factor, graphics, is used only if a
graphic appears in the text.
To make the final determination as to whether a text is at grade-level and thus
appropriate to be included on a Grades 3–8 assessment, New York State uses a two-step
review process, which is an industry best-practice. First, all prospective passages
undergo quantitative text complexity analysis using three text complexity measures. If
at least two of the three measures suggest that the passage is grade-appropriate, the
passage then moves to the second step, which is the qualitative review using the text-
complexity rubrics. Only passages that are determined appropriate by at least two of
three quantitative measures of complexity and are determined appropriate by the
qualitative measure of complexity are deemed appropriate for use on the exam.
Text Complexity Metrics for 2022 Grade 8 Passages
Passage Title Word
Count
Lexile
Flesch-Kincaid
ATOS
Qualitative
Review
Excerpt from "The Beadwork" from
American Indian Stories 948 1050 7 7.5 Appropriate
Excerpt from The Guest Cat 818 1120 8.7 7.3 Appropriate
Excerpt from The Call of Coney Island 777 1130 10.2 8.9 Appropriate
Excerpt from “What Kids Learn from
Hearing Family Stories” 752 1190 10 8.5 Appropriate
Excerpt from 100 Days and 99 Nights 746 1170 9 7.4 Appropriate
"Rain Check" 173 N/A N/A N/A Appropriate
New York State 2022 Quantitative Text Complexity Chart for Assessment and Curriculum
To determine if a text’s quantitative complexity is at the appropriate grade level, New
York State uses the table below. In cases where a text is excerpted from a large work,
only the complexity of the excerpt that students see on the test is measured, not the
large work, so it is possible that the complexity of a book might be above or below grade
level, but the text used on the assessment is at grade level. Because the measurement
of text complexity is inexact, quantitative measures of complexity are defined by grade
band rather than by individual grade level and then paired with the qualitative review by
an educator.
Grade
Band ATOS
Degrees of
Reading
Power Flesch-Kincaid
The Lexile
Framework
Reading
Maturity SourceRater
2nd –3rd 2.75 – 5.14 42 – 54 1.98 – 5.34 420 – 820 3.53 – 6.13 0.05 – 2.48
4th –5th 4.97 – 7.03 52 – 60 4.51 – 7.73 740 – 1010 5.42 – 7.92 0.84 – 5.75
6th –8th 7.00 – 9.98 57 – 67 6.51 – 10.34 925 – 1185 7.04 – 9.57 4.11 – 10.66
9th –10th 9.67 – 12.01 62 – 72 8.32 – 12.12 1050 – 1335 8.41 – 10.81 9.02 – 13.93
11th –12th 11.20 – 14.10 67 – 74 10.34 – 14.20 1185 – 1385 9.57 – 12.00 12.30 – 14.50
Source: Student Achievement Partners
RELEASED QUESTIONS
Excerpt from “The Beadwork” from American Indian Stories by Zitkala-Sa. Used with permission of University of Nebraska Press via
Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from The Guest Cat by Takashi Hiraide. Copyright © 2001 by Takashi Hiraide. Used with permission of New Directions via
Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from “The Call of Coney Island” by Cynthia Overbeck Bix, Cobblestone, July 1, 2015. Copyright © 2015 by Cricket Media.
Used with permission of Carus Publishing Company via Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by Questar Assessment Inc., 5550 Upper 147th
Street West, Minneapolis, MN 55124. Copyright © 2022 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1

EExxcceerrpptt ffrroomm ““ee BBeeaaddwwoorrkk”” ffrroommAAmmeerriiccaann IInnddiiaann SSttoorriieess
by Zitkala-Sa
Soon aer breakfast mother sometimes began her beadwork. On a bright, clear day,
she pulled out the wooden pegs that pinned the skirt of our wigwam to the ground, and
rolled the canvas part way up on its frame of slender poles. en the cool morning
breezes swept freely through our dwelling, now and then waing the perfume of sweet
grasses from the newly burnt prairie.
1
Untying the long tasseled strings that bound a small brown buckskin bag, my
mother spread upon a mat beside her bunches of colored beads, just as an artist
arranges the paints upon his palette. On a lapboard she smoothed out a double sheet of
so white buckskin; and drawing from a beaded case that hung on the le of her wide
belt a long, narrow blade, she trimmed the buckskin into shape. Oen she worked
upon small moccasins for her small daughter. en I became intensely interested in her
designing. With a proud, beaming face, I watched her work. In imagination, I saw
myself walking in a new pair of snugly fitting moccasins. I felt the envious eyes of my
playmates upon the pretty red beads decorating my feet.
2
Close beside my mother I sat on a rug, with a scrap of buckskin in one hand and an
awl in the other. is was the beginning of my practical observation lessons in the art
of beadwork. From a skein of finely twisted threads of silvery sinews my mother pulled
out a single one. With an awl she pierced the buckskin, and skillfully threaded it with
the white sinew. Picking up the tiny beads one by one, she strung them with the point
of her thread, always twisting it carefully aer every stitch. . . .
3
Always aer these confining lessons I was wild with surplus spirits, and found
joyous relief in running loose in the open again. Many a summer aernoon a party of
four or five of my playmates roamed over the hills with me. We each carried a light,
sharpened rod about four feet long, with which we pried up certain sweet roots. When
we had eaten all the choice roots we chanced upon, we shouldered our rods and strayed
off into patches of a stalky plant under whose yellow blossoms we found little crystal
4
Page 8GO ON
Session 1
Read this passage. Then answer questions 8 through 14.
drops of gum. Drop by drop we gathered this nature’s rock-candy, until each of us
could boast of a lump the size of a small bird’s egg. Soon satiated11 with its woody
flavor, we tossed away our gum, to return again to the sweet roots.
I remember well how we used to exchange our necklaces, beaded belts, and
sometimes even our moccasins. We pretended to offer them as gis to one another. We
delighted in impersonating our own mothers. We talked of things we had heard them
say in their conversations. We imitated their various manners, even to the inflection of
their voices. In the lap of the prairie we seated ourselves upon our feet, and leaning our
painted cheeks in the palms of our hands, we rested our elbows on our knees, and bent
forward as old women were most accustomed to do.
5
While one was telling of some heroic deed recently done by a near relative, the rest
of us listened attentively, and exclaimed in undertones “Han! han!” (yes! yes!) whenever
the speaker paused for breath, or sometimes for our sympathy. As the discourse
became more thrilling, according to our ideas, we raised our voices in these
interjections. In these impersonations our parents were led to say only those things that
were in common favor.
6
No matter how exciting a tale we might be rehearsing, the mere shiing of a cloud
shadow in the landscape near by was sufficient to change our impulses; and soon we
were all chasing the great shadows that played among the hills. We shouted and
whooped in the chase; laughing and calling to one another, we were like little
sportive nymphs22 on that Dakota sea of rolling green.
7
On one occasion I forgot the cloud shadow in a strange notion to catch up with my
own shadow. Standing straight and still, I began to glide aer it, putting out one foot
cautiously. When, with the greatest care, I set my foot in advance of myself, my shadow
crept onward too. en again I tried it; this time with the other foot. Still again my
shadow escaped me. I began to run; and away flew my shadow, always just a step
beyond me. Faster and faster I ran, setting my teeth and clenching my fists, determined
to overtake my own fleet shadow. But ever swier it glided before me while I was
growing breathless and hot. Slackening my speed, I was greatly vexed that my shadow
should check its pace also. Daring it to the utmost, as I thought, I sat down upon a rock
imbedded in the hillside.
8
So! my shadow had the impudence33 to sit down beside me!9
Now my comrades caught up with me, and began to ask why I was running away so
fast.
10
Page 9Session 1
GO ON
_______________________
11ssaattiiaatteedd:: completely satisfied
22ssppoorrttiivvee nnyymmpphhss:: playful creatures of the woods
33iimmppuuddeennccee:: nerve
“Oh, I was chasing my shadow! Didn’t you ever do that?” I inquired, surprised that
they should not understand.
11
ey planted their moccasined feet firmly upon my shadow to stay it, and I arose.
Again my shadow slipped away, and moved as oen as I did. en we gave up trying to
catch my shadow.
12
Before this peculiar experience, I have no distinct memory of having recognized any
vital bond between myself and my shadow. I never gave it an aerthought.
13
Returning to our borrowed belts and trinkets, we rambled homeward. at evening,
as on other evenings, I went to sleep over my legends.
14
Page 10GO ON
Session 1
Which detail bbeesstt reflects the narrator’s point of view of her mother and her beadwork?
A comparing the mother to an artist arranging paints upon a palette
B describing the mother drawing a blade to trim the buckskin
C mentioning the mother making moccasins for her daughter
D describing the mother picking up the tiny beads one at a time
What similarity is shared between the events in paragraph 3 and the events in paragraph 4?
A Both paragraphs emphasize the value of honoring family traditions.
B Both paragraphs describe the ability to use tools with precision.
C Both paragraphs demonstrate how teachers inspire others.
D Both paragraphs highlight the joys of friendship and play.
e central idea of paragraph 4 is
A children enjoy eating sweet things
B the narrator is a leader among her friends
C children are able to make their own fun
D the setting has many natural resources
8
9
10
Page 11Session 1
GO ON
What does the narrator’s frequent use of the word “we” in paragraphs 4 and 5 suggest?
A youthfulness
B dependence
C companionship
D remembrance
What is the meaning of “discourse” as used in paragraph 6?
A brief remark
B spoken story
C response to someone
D disagreement between people
How do paragraphs 8 and 9 contrast with the paragraphs right before and aer them?
A ey provide a look at the narrator’s imagination.
B ey demonstrate the narrator’s desire for independence.
C ey emphasize the narrator’s physical abilities.
D ey focus attention on the narrator’s selfish nature.
11
12
13
Page 12GO ON
Session 1
Which sentence bbeesstt expresses a central idea of the passage?
A e narrator is interested in her mother’s beadwork on small moccasins.
B Aer beadwork lessons with her mother, the narrator loves to
play outdoors.
C e narrator’s friends try to help her catch her shadow while playing.
D When running through the fields, the narrator and her friends make lots
of noise.
14
Page 13Session 1
GO ON
is story takes place in Japan. e narrator has just rented a new home on a small street
named Lightning Alley.
EExxcceerrpptt ffrroomm
ee GGuueesstt CCaatt
by Takashi Hiraide
e cat’s name was Chibi, which means “little one.” We could hear the boy’s
particularly high-pitched voice calling the cat: “Chibi!” en we’d hear the sound of
the boy’s shoes running around outside, followed by the tinkling of the little bell
announcing the cat’s arrival.
1
Chibi was a jewel of a cat. Her pure white fur was mottled with several lampblack
blotches containing just a bit of light brown. e sort of cat you might see just about
anywhere in Japan, except she was especially slim and tiny.
2
ese were her individual characteristics—slim and small, with ears that stood out,
tapering off beautifully at the tips, and oen twitching. She would approach silently and
undetected to rub up against one’s legs. At first I thought Chibi avoided me because I
was not used to cats, but this seems not to have been the case. When a girl who oen
passed along Lightning Alley stopped and crouched to gaze at the cat, it did not run
away. But as soon as she attempted to touch it, the cat quickly slipped off, avoiding
contact at all costs. e cat’s manner of rejection was like cold, white light.
3
Moreover, the cat rarely made a sound. As far as I remember, when it first appeared
in the alley it made some sort of sound, but since then it had never let out a meow. It
looked as if no matter how much time passed the cat was not going to let us hear its
voice. is seemed to be the message the cat was giving us.
4
Another one of Chibi’s characteristics was that she changed the direction of her
cautious attention frequently. is active behavior wasn’t limited to her
kittenhood. Perhaps because she played alone most of the time in the expansive garden,
she reacted strongly to insects and reptiles. And there were times when I could only
conclude that she must be reacting to subtle changes in the wind and light, not
detectable by humans. It may be that most cats share the same quickness, but even so,
in Chibi’s case, it was acute—she was, aer all, the cat of Lightning Alley. My wife got
into the habit of pointing to the cat whenever it went by, extolling11 its virtues. . . .
5
Page 20GO ON
Session 1
Read this story. Then answer questions 22 through 28.
_______________________
11eexxttoolllliinngg:: praising
22ttaalliissmmaann:: an object thought to bring good luck
33uubbiiqquuiittoouuss:: present everywhere
Chibi, who loved to play ball, gradually began to visit us on her own and would try
and get us to play with her. She would step gingerly into the room and gaze intently at
its occupants, then purposefully turn around and walk back out, as if to lead us to the
garden. is process would be repeated until she got a response. Most of the time my
wife would put down whatever she was doing, slip happily into her sandals and head
outside.
6
Having played to her heart’s content, Chibi would come inside and rest for a while.
When she began to sleep on the sofa—like a talisman 22 curled gently in the shape of a
comma and dug up from a prehistoric archaeological site—a deep sense of happiness
arrived, as if the house itself had dreamed this scene.
7
Avoiding the prying eyes of the landlady, we began leaving it up to Chibi to come
inside the house whenever she wanted—and with this new development I had begun
little by little to understand cat lovers. Whether on TV or in all of the ubiquitous33 cat
calendars, it seemed as if there was no cat comparable to her. But, though I had started
to think of her as the best cat around, she was not really our cat.
8
First we would hear the tinkling of the bell, and then she would appear, so we began
to call her by the nickname “Tinkerbell.” Whenever we wanted her to come over, this
name seemed to find itself on our lips.
9
“I wonder where Tinkerbell is.” By the time my wife had gotten the words out of her
mouth we’d hear the tinkling of Chibi’s bell. We’d realize that she was near at the point
where, exiting the foyer next door (located at the second corner of Lightning Alley),
Chibi would leap through the tear in the wire-mesh boundary of the property, dash
along the side of the building, turn at the far end of the veranda, leap up onto the open
area of the deck, and then, placing her front paws on the window frame at about the
height of a human adult’s knee, stretch out her neck to peek inside.
10
In winter she came inside. Little by little, through the crack in the partially opened
window, her tendency to visit subtly developed; her appearances were repeated until, as
if a silken opening in a fabric had been continuously moistened and stretched, Chibi
had entered our lives. But at the same time—call it fate if you will—something else was
closing in and pressing itself against that tendency.
11
Page 21Session 1
GO ON
What does the phrase “cold, white light” in paragraph 3 suggest about Chibi?
A She prefers to be outdoors during the day.
B She demands fast responses from humans.
C She struggles to survive outside in the winter.
D She is indifferent to the feelings of humans.
What is the meaning of the word “subtle” as it is used in paragraph 5?
A environmental
B slight
C powerful
D rapid
How does the narrator’s point of view shi in paragraphs 7 and 8?
A He grows concerned the landlady will discover the cat.
B He starts to think about keeping the cat.
C He becomes worried for the safety of the cat.
D He begins to feel affection toward the cat.
22
23
24
Page 22GO ON
Session 1
In paragraph 8, why does the narrator say he “had begun little by little to understand
cat lovers”?
A He realizes that most cats are probably like Chibi.
B He decides to buy a cat calendar to celebrate Chibi.
C He feels a sense of contentment when Chibi visits.
D He is in awe of the boy who runs around outside with Chibi.
Which activity first leads Chibi to engage with the narrator and his wife?
A sleeping on the sofa
B staying away from the landlady
C wanting to play ball
D being called by a nickname
Which quotation bbeesstt expresses a central idea of the story?
A “e cat’s name was Chibi, which means ‘little one.’ ” (paragraph 1)
B “e cat’s manner of rejection was like cold, white light.” (paragraph 3)
C “Having played to her heart’s content, Chibi would come inside and rest for
a while.” (paragraph 7)
D “But, though I had started to think of her as the best cat around, she was
not really our cat.” (paragraph 8)
25
26
27
Page 23Session 1
GO ON
Which statement would be mmoosstt important to include in a summary of the story?
A Chibi looks especially slim and tiny for a cat.
B Chibi grows comfortable with the narrator and his wife.
C Chibi avoids being touched by humans.
D Chibi rarely makes a sound except for the tinkling of her bell.
28
Page 24GO ON
Session 1
EExxcceerrpptt ffrroomm
ThThee CCaallll ooff CCoonneeyy IIssllaanndd
by Cynthia Overbeck Bix
1
2
3
Salty ocean smells mingle with the aromas of sweet cotton candy and Nathan’s
Famous hot dogs. The legendary Cyclone roller coaster lurches along its tracks—then
takes a heart-stopping plunge. Riders whoop and scream with excitement. Farther
down the boardwalk, the sound of a carousel starts. Patrons pitch balls at moving
targets, hoping to win a prize. Welcome to Coney Island, the nation’s first truly modern
amusement area.
Located on the southern tip of Brooklyn, New York, Coney Island has been the place
to go for fun for more than a century. The inspiration for amusement parks such as
Coney Island sprang from an exciting event in 1893—the World’s Columbian
Exposition in Chicago. It was one of the first venues where people experienced a variety
of attractions in one large space.
Visitors to Chicago gasped in wonder when they saw the fair’s “White City” spread
out before them. Beautiful all-white exhibition buildings and large classical statues
framed a lagoon of shimmering water. Designed to educate and inform, about a dozen
grand buildings housed displays on the latest developments in transportation,
machinery, agriculture, art, horticulture, and more. Most visitors had never seen the
things they saw there, such as electric lights, a moving sidewalk, world-famous artwork,
and moving pictures.
While the World’s Columbian Exposition awed people with new innovations and
ideas, its most popular attraction was the Midway Plaisance. Located in a separate
section of the exhibition grounds, the Midway was filled with entertainment: rides, food
stands, and sideshows. People could get a taste of international cultures, for example,
by riding a camel through the Streets of Cairo or strolling among the thatched huts of a
South Sea village. Best of all, they could ride George Ferris’s giant spinning wheel.
Rising 264 feet above the Midway, this engineering marvel became the star of the fair. It
was a spectacular example of what the new age of machines made possible.
4
Page 25Session 1
GO ON
Read this article. Then answer questions 29 through 35.
5
6
7
8
9
10
One visitor, New York showman George C. Tilyou, immediately saw potential for
this new form of entertainment. Tilyou owned property on Coney Island, which
already was an established beach resort with hotels, bathhouses, and restaurants. It also
featured an odd collection of sideshows, food vendors, fortunetellers, and more. Tilyou
decided to build an enclosed amusement park there.
In 1897, Tilyou opened Steeplechase Park. When he was unable to buy Ferris’s
wheel, he had his own version built. For 25 cents, visitors could ride Tilyou’s wheel,
enjoy the Scenic Railway, or climb into a “spaceship” for a Trip to the Moon. On the
Steeplechase, wooden horses carried riders along a metal racetrack from a starting gate
to a finish line.
Steeplechase Park’s huge success was partly due to another invention—electric
railways. The first electric trolley line had connected Manhattan Island and
Coney Island in the mid-1800s. By the turn of the 20th century, an electric train
offered an even faster way to carry more people wanting to escape from the hot,
crowded city.
In the late 1800s and early 1900s, most people worked long hours and six days a
week in urban factories and shops. But for a nickel fare, a city worker could afford a
day’s outing to a nearby park on Sundays. Recognizing the value of giving the working
class access to day trips, trolley and train companies established parks that were located
at the end of a line. Travelers disembarked to enjoy simple outdoor pleasures in picnic
groves and swimming pools or beaches. Eventually, merry-go-rounds, penny arcades,11
and even small roller coasters were added. . . .
Part sideshow, part circus, part theme park, Coney Island set an example for
amusement parks. Attractions that are so familiar today—roller coasters, water rides,
fun houses, Tunnels of Love—all got their start there.
Many amusement parks closed during the Great Depression in the 1930s or during
World War II (1939–1945). Coney Island has had its ups and downs, too. Over the
decades, fires and age destroyed some of the original attractions. In 2012, Superstorm
Sandy wrecked the boardwalk and many of the attractions.
Page 26GO ON
Session 1
In spite of all that, Coney Island has survived, and it is still operating today. It
continues to offer each new generation of kids (and their parents) a chance to escape to
a special world of entertainment and thrills. And from New Jersey’s Wildwood Park to
California’s Pacific Park and Florida’s Walt Disney World, other amusement and
theme parks have taken their cues from Coney Island. They have grown to epic
proportions in their efforts to offer a world full of fun.
11ppeennnnyy aarrccaaddeess:: indoor area with amusements such as games and photo booths operated by
placing a coin in a slot
_______________________
11
Page 27Session 1
GO ON
In paragraph 1, what does the phrase “lurches along its tracks—then takes a heart-stopping
plunge” suggest about the Cyclone roller coaster?
A It moves at an unexpected rate of speed.
B It provides a thrilling experience for riders.
C It appeals to some visitors but not others.
D It presents a safety hazard for riders.
Why was George Ferris’s wheel considered an “engineering marvel” (paragraph 4)?
A
B
C
D
It became the most popular attraction at the exposition.
It was the fastest ride in the Midway section of the exposition.
It gave people the opportunity to see the capabilities of new technology.
It was something that other amusement park owners tried to bring to their parks.
How did Tilyou’s visit to the World’s Columbian Exposition affect the property at
Coney Island?
A Tilyou was motivated to build a park with amusement rides.
B Tilyou brought George Ferris’s giant wheel to Coney Island.
C Tilyou created multiple attractions based on different themes.
D Tilyou decided to construct an electric railway to Coney Island.
29
30
31
Page 28GO ON
Session 1

Read this sentence from paragraph 11.
AAnndd ffrroomm NNeeww JJeerrsseeyy’’ss WWiillddwwoooodd PPaarrkk ttoo CCaalliiffoorrnniiaa’’ss PPaacciifificc PPaarrkk aanndd FFlloorriiddaa’’ss
WWaalltt DDiissnneeyy WWoorrlldd,, ootthheerr aammuusseemmeenntt aanndd tthheemmee ppaarrkkss hhaavvee ttaakkeenn tthheeiirr ccuueess ffrroomm
CCoonneeyy IIssllaanndd..
Which quotation bbeesstt supports this claim?
A
B
“e inspiration for amusement parks such as Coney Island sprang from an
exciting event in 1893—the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago.”
(paragraph 2)
“When he was unable to buy Ferris’s wheel, he had his own version
built.” (paragraph 6)
C “Attractions that are so familiar today—roller coasters, water rides, fun
houses, Tunnels of Love—all got their start there.” (paragraph 9)
D “ey have grown to epic proportions in their efforts to offer a world full of
fun.” (paragraph 11)
Which statement expresses a central idea developed tthhrroouugghhoouutt the article?
A e Coney Island amusement park was initially separated by different types
of entertainment.
B e World’s Columbian Exposition had many elements that were later used
in the Coney Island amusement park.
C e Coney Island amusement park was influenced by previous attractions
and eventually impacted the modern amusement park.
D e invention of the electric railway was important to the popularity of the
Coney Island amusement park.
34
35
Page 30Session 1
STOP
Grade 8
2022
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
March 29–31, 2022

Excerpt from “What Kids Learn From Hearing Family Stories” by Elaine Reese, The Atlantic, December 9, 2013. Copyright © 2013 by
Atlantic Media, Inc. Used with permission of Atlantic Monthly Co. via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from 100 Days and 99 Nights by Alan Madison. Copyright © 2008 by Alan Madison. Published by Little, Brown Books for Young
Readers. Used with permission of Hachette Book Group, Inc. via Copyright Clearance Center.
“Rain Check” excerpt from The Sky Between You and Me, copyright 2017 by Catherine Alene. Used by permission of Sourcebooks.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by Questar Assessment Inc., 5550 Upper 147th
Street West, Minneapolis, MN 55124. Copyright © 2022 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 2
Session 2
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some suggestions to help you do your best:
• Be sure to read all the directions carefully.
• Most questions will make sense only when you read the whole passage. You may read
the passage more than once to answer a question. When a question includes a quotation
from a passage, be sure to keep in mind what you learned from reading the whole
passage. You may need to review both the quotation and the passage in order to answer
the question correctly.
• Read each question carefully and think about the answer before writing your response.
• In writing your responses, be sure to
– clearly organize your writing and express what you have learned;
– accurately and completely answer the questions being asked;
– support your responses with examples or details from the text; and
– write in complete sentences using correct spelling, grammar, capitalization,
and punctuation.
• For the last question in this test book, you may plan your writing on the Planning Page
provided, but do NOT write your final answer on this Planning Page. Writing on this
Planning Page will NOT count toward your final score. Write your final answer on the
lined response pages provided.
Page 1Session 2
Elaine Reese is a professor of psychology and the author of a book about telling stories.
EExxcceerrpptt ffrroomm
WWhhaatt KKiiddss LLeeaarrnn FFrroomm
HHeeaarriinngg FFaammiillyy SSttoorriieess
by Elaine Reese
“Dad, tell me a story from when you were little. Tell me the story about the time you
met your best friend Chris at school.” Six-year-old Alex, who has just started school
himself, snuggles into his pillow and catches his dad’s hand in the dark. ey have
finished the nightly reading of
Tin Tin and now it’s time for “just one more story”
before Alex goes to sleep.
1
Most parents know about the benefits of reading stories from books with their
young children. Parents are blasted with this message in pediatricians’ offices, at
preschool, on TV, even with billboards on the city bus. Reading books with children on
a daily basis advances their language skills, extends their learning about the world, and
helps their own reading later in school. Reading with your child from a young age can
instill a lifelong love of books. A new study published in
Science even shows that
reading literary fiction improves adults’ ability to understand other people’s emotions.
2
Reading books with your children is clearly a good idea. . . .3
Yet what most parents don’t know is that everyday family stories, like the one that
Alex’s dad spun out that night, confer many of the same benefits of reading—and even
some new ones.
4
Over the last 25 years, a small canon11 of research on family storytelling shows that
when parents share more family stories with their children—especially when they tell
those stories in a detailed and responsive way—their children benefit in a host of ways.
For instance, experimental studies show that when parents learn to reminisce22 about
everyday events with their preschool children in more detailed ways, their children tell
richer, more complete narratives to other adults one to two years later compared to
children whose parents didn’t learn the new reminiscing techniques. Children of the
parents who learned new ways to reminisce also demonstrate better understanding of
other people’s thoughts and emotions. ese advanced narrative and emotional skills
5
Page 2GO ON
Session 2
Read this article. Then answer questions 36 through 38.
serve children well in the school years when reading complex material and learning to
get along with others. In the preteen years, children whose families collaboratively
discuss everyday events and family history more oen have higher self-esteem and
stronger self-concepts. And adolescents with a stronger knowledge of family history
have more robust identities, better coping skills, and lower rates of depression and
anxiety. Family storytelling can help a child grow into a teen who feels connected to the
important people in her life.
Best of all, unlike stories from books, family stories are always free and completely
portable. You don’t even need to have the lights on to share with your child a story
about your day, about their day, about your childhood or their grandma’s. In the
research on family storytelling, all of these kinds of stories are linked to benefits for
your child. Family stories can continue to be part of a parent’s daily interactions with
their children into adolescence, long past the age of the bedtime story.
6
All families have stories to tell, regardless of their culture or their circumstances. Of
course, not all of these stories are idyllic 33 ones. Research shows that children and
adolescents can learn a great deal from stories of life’s more difficult moments—as long
as those stories are told in a way that is sensitive to the child’s level of understanding,
and as long as something good is gleaned from the experience. . . .
7
Books contain narratives, but only family stories contain your family’s
personal
narratives. Fortunate children get both. ey hear and read stories from books to
become part of other people’s worlds, and they hear and tell stories of their family to
understand who they are and from whence they came. . . .
8
e holidays are prime time for family storytelling. When you’re . . . having your
holiday meal, share a story with your children about past holidays. Leave in the funny
bits, the sad bits, the gory and smelly bits—kids can tell when a story has been sanitized
for their protection. en invite everyone else to tell a story too. Don’t forget the
youngest and the oldest storytellers in the group. eir stories may not be as coherent,44
but they can be the truest, and the most revealing.
9
Page 3Session 2
GO ON
_______________________
11ccaannoonn:: collection
22rreemmiinniissccee:: remember past events in an enjoyable or emotionally warm way
33iiddyylllliicc:: ideal or perfectly positive
44ccoohheerreenntt:: clear
Family stories can be told nearly anywhere. ey cost us only our time, our
memories, our creativity. ey can inspire us, protect us, and bind us to others. So be
generous with your stories, and be generous
in your stories. Remember that your
children may have them for a lifetime.
10
Page 4GO ON
Session 2
In “Excerpt from
What Kids Learn From Hearing Family Stories,” how does the author develop
a connection between stories from books and family stories? Use ttwwoo details from the article to
support your response.
36
Page 5Session 2
GO ON
How does paragraph 5 support a central claim in “Excerpt from
What Kids Learn From
Hearing Family Stories”? Use ttwwoo details from the article to support your response.
37
Page 6GO ON
Session 2
What does the author mean in paragraph 10 when she recommends to the reader to
“be generous
in your stories”? Use ttwwoo details from the article to support your response.
38
Page 7Session 2
GO ON
Dad is in the U.S. Army. Each Saturday he leads his two children, Esme and Ike, on a mission
to make the best pancakes in the world.
EExxcceerrpptt ffrroomm
110000 DDaayyss aanndd 9999 NNiigghhttss
by Alan Madison
I am best at beating the batter, Ike is best at greasing the griddle, and Dad is, of
course, far and away the finest flipper between here and just about anywhere. While we
are working, Mom sits sipping coffee and reading the
Drum & Bugle. She makes sure
there are no mistakes in either the newspaper or the manner in which we prepare
pancakes. Dad says she is a “super supervisor.”
1
To make sure our pancakes come out consistently top-dog tasty, it is extremely
important to do everything precisely the same way it was done the Saturday before, the
Saturday before that, and before that. To do that, we follow Dad’s pancake rules. . . .
2
Saturday mornings, when the cuckoo clock begins the first of eight cuckoos, Ike and
I slip downstairs, drop our aprons over our heads, and tie the string over our bellies,
each with the exact same double-looped bow. We try to finish before the mechanical
bird sticks its tiny red-tued head out to deliver the final high-pitched cuckoo.
3
While we wash our hands in the kitchen sink, Dad, in his green-and-yellow-squared
flannel robe, rubbing the top of his buzz-cut head, pounds down the stairs. Blinking the
sleep from his eyes, he inspects our cooking uniforms. When satisfied, he yawns,
“Okay, troops, we are ready to cook.”
4
We salute, bringing our open right hands sharply to our foreheads and then karate
chopping them down. is is military speak for “ready, willing, and able.” Dad says we
should always end it with “sir, yes, sir,” to show the proper respect for a commanding
officer.
5
“Sir, yes, sir!” Ike and I cry in unison.6
“One cup flour,” he commands.7
“Flour is made from flowers,” Ike states as usual.8
Dad smiles and I roll my eyes around my head because
every week Ike always swears
that flour (F-L-O-U-R) is made from flowers (F-L-O-W-E-R-S) and that is why they are
9
Page 8GO ON
Session 2
Read this story. Then answer questions 39 and 40.
spelled differently. is makes zero sense, which is exactly Ike Sense, because then they
should be spelled exactly the same! . . .
Under Dad’s watchful eye, we exact-measure and combine the salt and baking soda
into the bowl. en, trying not to make too much of a mess, we carefully measure out
the wet ingredients: water, oil, and the top secretest ingredient —“Yogurt!” Ike yells.
“Yogurt, yoooguurt!” he screams. Ike feels that
yogurt is the absolute funniest word he
has ever heard and as soon as dad starts spooning out the glistening white goo, he starts
giggling and rolling the word out of his mouth, either drawing out the so-sounding
“yo” or cutting off the hard-syllabled “gurt” and sometimes even attempting to do both.
“Yoooogrt!” Mom chuckles from behind the spread-open
Drum & Bugle as Ike goes
through his word acrobatics while I remain silent because I feel
llama is an even
funnier word.
10
Dad knows a lot of funny words, but during pancake making he is always partial to
spatula. . . .
11
I wooden-spoon-mix together all the ingredients, from the Ike Sense-spelled flour to
the somewhat funny-named yogurt, while Ike quick-drops pats of butter onto the hot
griddle. Mom super-supervises this part, letting out an
aaahh sound of approval each
time Ike places a pat correctly and an
ooo-ooo-ooo sound of disapproval each time his
hand comes down too close to the stove.
12
Dad big-spoons batter onto the burning black metal. It flattens and soon little
bubbles begin bursting. Aer we count out five of these tiny explosions, Dad does the
famous fancy McCarther flip. He skillfully slides his “spaaatuulaaa” under one round
and snaps his wrist, revealing both the colorful tattoo on his wide forearm and the
brown cooked side of the perfect pancake.
13
A most definite Dad cooking rule is: “Neither a borrower nor a lender be.” is
means that when it comes to a particular pancaking post, whether it is buttering,
mixing, or flipping, you have your very own job to do, and you should never ever trade
or even ask to trade—you just do your job. Our cooking tasks have become total
no-brainers and given the excellent eating results, I have to say that Dad’s pancaking
rules most definitely do work.
14
e short stacks are piled high on each of our plates, the maple syrup slow-flowed,
and the only sounds heard are the rushed clicks and clacks of forks on plates and the
rumble of satisfied
ummms. . . .
15
is is an absolute authentic account of how every Saturday we, the Swishback
McCarthers, would cook the tastiest pancakes in the whole world.
16
Page 9Session 2
GO ON
In “Excerpt from
100 Days and 99 Nights,” what effect does the children saying “Sir, yes, sir!” in
paragraph 6 have on the story’s tone? Use ttwwoo details from the story to support your response.
39
Page 10GO ON
Session 2
In “Excerpt from
100 Days and 99 Nights,” how do paragraph 2 and paragraph 14 contribute to
the structure of the story? Use ttwwoo details from the story to support your response.
40
Page 11Session 2
GO ON
5
10
15
20
RRaaiinn CChheecckk
by Catherine Alene
Dad had to work
Straight through the day and into the night
Ringy cows11 wouldn’t load
Raced across the mesa22 with their heads in the air
I’d finally decided what I was going to make
Pizza
His favorite
Heavy with meat and American cheese
His side
Veggies
No cheese
On mine
But it’s okay
He didn’t make it home
I hadn’t even started cooking when he called
I’d been standing in the kitchen
Staring into the refrigerator
Ignoring the sun melting red and gold behind the barn
Listening to Blue crunching his kibbles 33
Tags chinging off the edge of his metal food dish
When the phone had rung
Page 12GO ON
Session 2
Read this poem. Then answer questions 41 through 43.
25
30
“I’m so sorry. I’ll have to take a rain check. Go ahead and eat
without me,” he’d said.
I understand, Dad.
We’ll do it again.
Next week.
It’s okay
Really
It
Is
_______________________
11rriinnggyy ccoowwss:: the cows’ bells ring as they run away from Dad
22mmeessaa:: a flat-topped, elevated area
33kkiibbbblleess:: pet food
Page 13Session 2
GO ON
How do lines 22 through 30 contribute to the plot of “Rain Check”? Use ttwwoo details from the
poem to support your response.
41
Page 14GO ON
Session 2
How does the speaker’s point of view impact the tone of “Rain Check”? Use ttwwoo details from
the poem to support your response.
42
Page 15Session 2
GO ON

e narrator of the story “Excerpt from
100 Days and 99 Nights” and the speaker in the poem
“Rain Check” have different points of view about their family situations. What is the narrator’s
point of view about her family situation in “Excerpt from
100 Days and 99 Nights”? What is the
speaker’s point of view about her family situation in “Rain Check”? How are these points of
view different? Use details from bbootthh the story and the poem to support your response.
In your response, be sure to
describe the narrator’s point of view about her family situation in “Excerpt from100 Days and 99 Nights”
describe the speaker’s point of view about her family situation in “Rain Check”
explain how these points of view are different
use details from bbootthh the story and the poem to support your response
43
Page 17Session 2
GO ON
Page 18Session 2
STOP
Grade 8
2022
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
March 29–31, 2022
Multiple Choice Questions
Percentage of Students Who
Answered Correctly
(P-Value)
Average
Points
Earned
P-Value
(Average Points Earned
÷ Total Possible Points)
8 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.6 Reading 0.61
9 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.3 Reading 0.45
10 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.2 Reading 0.58
11 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.4 Reading 0.69
12 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.8.4 Reading 0.52
13 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.5 Reading 0.64
14 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.2 Reading 0.7
22 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.4 Reading 0.71
23 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.8.4 Reading 0.7
24 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.6 Reading 0.68
25 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.3 Reading 0.7
26 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.3 Reading 0.56
27 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.2 Reading 0.64
28 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.2 Reading 0.78
29 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.4 Reading 0.62
30 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.4 Reading 0.57
31 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.3 Reading 0.55
32 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.4 Reading 0.69
33 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.6 Reading 0.78
34 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.8 Reading 0.58
35 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.2 Reading 0.65
36 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.3 Writing to Sources 1.62 0.81
37 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.8 Writing to Sources 1.63 0.82
38 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.8.4 Writing to Sources 1.51 0.76
39 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.4 Writing to Sources 1.52 0.76
40 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.5 Writing to Sources 1.53 0.77
41 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.3 Writing to Sources 1.47 0.73
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2022 English Language Arts Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 8 Released Questions
Session 2
Constructed Response Questions
Session 1
Question Type Key Points Standard Subscore
42 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.6 Writing to Sources 1.48 0.74
43 Constructed Response 4 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.8.6 Writing to Sources 2.33 0.58
*This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question on the 2022 operational ELA test. However, each constructed-response question
measures proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards. For example, two-point and four-point constructed-response questions
require students to first conduct the analyses described in the mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on writing standards. To gain greater insight into the
measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please refer to the rubrics shown in the Educator Guides.