New York State administered the English Language Arts Tests
in March 2022 and is now making approximately 75% of the
questions from these tests available for review and use.
New York State Testing Program
Grade 7
English Language Arts Test
Released Questions
2022
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program
Grades 3–8 English Language Arts
Released Questions from 2022 Exams
Background
As in past years, the State Education Department (SED) is releasing large portions of the 2022 NYS
Grades 3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics test materials for review, discussion, and use.
For 2022, included in these released materials are at least 75 percent of the test questions that appeared on
the 2022 tests (including all constructed-response questions) that counted toward students’ scores.
Additionally, SED is providing information about the released passages; the associated text complexity for each
passage; and a map that details what learning standards each released question measures and the correct
response to each question. These released materials will help students, families, educators, and the public better
understand the tests and the New York State Education Department’s expectations for students.
Understanding ELA Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P–12 Learning Standards in English
Language Arts. These questions ask students to analyze different aspects of a given text, including central idea,
style elements, character and plot development, and vocabulary. Almost all questions, including vocabulary
questions, will be answered correctly only if the student comprehends and makes use of the whole passage.
Short-Response Questions
Short-response questions are designed to assess New York State P–12 Reading and Language Standards.
These are single questions in which a student uses textual evidence to support their answer to an
inferential question. These questions ask the student to make an inference (a claim, position, or conclusion)
based on their analysis of the passage, and then provide two pieces of text-based evidence to support their
answer.
The purpose of the short-response questions is to assess a student’s ability to comprehend and analyze text.
In responding to these questions, students are expected to write in complete sentences. Responses require no
more than three complete sentences. The rubric used for evaluating short-response questions can be found in
the grade-level Educator Guides at http://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/grades-3-8-ela-and-math-test-
manuals.
Extended-Response Questions
Extended-response questions are designed to measure a student’s ability to write from sources. Questions that
measure Writing from Sources prompt students to communicate a clear and coherent analysis of one or two
texts. The comprehension and analysis required by each extended response is directly related to grade-
specific reading standards. Student responses are evaluated on the degree to which they meet grade-level writing
and language expectations. This evaluation is made by using a rubric that incorporates demands of grade-
specific New York State P–12 Reading and Language standards.
The integrated nature of the standards for ELA and literacy requires that students are evaluated across the
strands (Reading, Writing, and Language) with longer pieces of writing, such as those prompted by the
extended-response questions. The rubric used for evaluating extended-response questions can be found in the
grade-level Educator Guides at http://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/grades-3-8-ela-and-math-test-
manuals.
New York State P–12 Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment to the New York State P–12 Learning Standards for English Language Arts is intended to identify
the analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. However, some questions measure
proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards.
For example, two-point and four-point constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the
analyses described in the mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on
writing standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions,
please refer to the rubrics.
These Released Questions Do Not Comprise a “Mini Test”
To ensure it is possible to develop future tests, some content must remain secure. This document is not
intended to be representative of the entire test, to show how operational tests look, or to provide
information about how teachers should administer the test; rather, its purpose is to provide an overview of how
the test reflects the demands of the New York State P–12 Learning Standards.
The released questions do not represent the full spectrum of the standards assessed on the State tests, nor do
they represent the full spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in the classroom. It
should not be assumed that a particular standard will be measured by an identical question in future
assessments.
2022 Grade 7 ELA Test Text Complexity Metrics for
Released Questions Available
Selecting high-quality, grade-appropriate passages requires both objective text
complexity metrics and expert judgment. For the Grades 3–8 assessments based on the
New York State P-12 Learning Standards for English Language Arts, both quantitative
and qualitative rubrics are used to determine the complexity of the texts and their
appropriate placement within a grade-level ELA exam.
Quantitative measures of text complexity are used to measure aspects of text
complexity that are difficult for a human reader to evaluate when examining a text.
These aspects include word frequency, word length, sentence length, and text cohesion.
These aspects are efficiently measured by computer programs. While quantitative text
complexity metrics are a helpful start, they are not definitive.
Qualitative measures are a crucial complement to quantitative measures. Using
qualitative measures of text complexity involves making an informed decision about the
difficulty of a text in terms of one or more factors discernible to a human reader
applying trained judgment to the task. To qualitatively determine the complexity of a
text, educators use a rubric composed of five factors; four of these factors are required
and one factor is optional. The required criteria are: meaning, text structure, language
features, and knowledge demands. The optional factor, graphics, is used only if a
graphic appears in the text.
To make the final determination as to whether a text is at grade-level and thus
appropriate to be included on a Grades 3–8 assessment, New York State uses a two-step
review process, which is an industry best-practice. First, all prospective passages
undergo quantitative text complexity analysis using three text complexity measures. If
at least two of the three measures suggest that the passage is grade-appropriate, the
passage then moves to the second step, which is the qualitative review using the text-
complexity rubrics. Only passages that are determined appropriate by at least two of
three quantitative measures of complexity and are determined appropriate by the
qualitative measure of complexity are deemed appropriate for use on the exam.
Text Complexity Metrics for 2022 Grade 7 Passages
Passage Title Word
Count
Lexile
Flesch-Kincaid
ATOS
Qualitative
Review
Excerpt from The Last Wild Place 920 1030 6.4 6.4 Appropriate
"Susan Butcher" from Ladies First 877 1070 9 7.6 Appropriate
Uncommon Instruments 843 1130 9.3 9.3 Appropriate
Unearthing the Arabia 902 920 7.5 7.6 Appropriate
"Persistent" from Words with Wings 209 N/A N/A N/A Appropriate
Excerpt from The Strictest School in the
World 540 920 6.1 6.6 Appropriate
New York State 2022 Quantitative Text Complexity Chart for Assessment and Curriculum
To determine if a text’s quantitative complexity is at the appropriate grade level, New
York State uses the table below. In cases where a text is excerpted from a large work,
only the complexity of the excerpt that students see on the test is measured, not the
large work, so it is possible that the complexity of a book might be above or below grade
level, but the text used on the assessment is at grade level. Because the measurement
of text complexity is inexact, quantitative measures of complexity are defined by grade
band rather than by individual grade level and then paired with the qualitative review by
an educator.
Grade
Band ATOS
Degrees of
Reading
Power Flesch-Kincaid
The Lexile
Framework
Reading
Maturity SourceRater
2nd –3rd 2.75 – 5.14 42 – 54 1.98 – 5.34 420 – 820 3.53 – 6.13 0.05 – 2.48
4th –5th 4.97 – 7.03 52 – 60 4.51 – 7.73 740 – 1010 5.42 – 7.92 0.84 – 5.75
6th –8th 7.00 – 9.98 57 – 67 6.51 – 10.34 925 – 1185 7.04 – 9.57 4.11 – 10.66
9th –10th 9.67 – 12.01 62 – 72 8.32 – 12.12 1050 – 1335 8.41 – 10.81 9.02 – 13.93
11th –12th 11.20 – 14.10 67 – 74 10.34 – 14.20 1185 – 1385 9.57 – 12.00 12.30 – 14.50
Source: Student Achievement Partners

Excerpt from The Last Wild Place by Rosa Jordan. Copyright © 2008 by Rosa Jordan. Used with permission of Peachtree Publishers, Inc. via
Copyright Clearance Center.
“Susan Butcher” by Elizabeth Cody Kimmel, from Ladies First: 40 Daring American Women Who Were Second to None. Copyright © 2006
by Elizabeth Cody Kimmel. Published by the National Geographic Society. Used with permission of National Geographic Partners via
Copyright Clearance Center.
“Uncommon Instruments” by the Library of Congress.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by Questar Assessment Inc., 5550 Upper 147th
Street West, Minneapolis, MN 55124. Copyright © 2022 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1

EExxcceerrpptt ffrroomm
ee LLaasstt WWiilldd PPllaaccee
by Rosa Jordan
During those first two weeks aer Luther stopped being his friend, Chip dreaded
going to school. e only hour of his day that was bearable was science class. Chip used
to think of science as a bunch of boring words in a textbook, but Mr. O’Dell had
changed all that. And kind of by accident, Chip had become one of Mr. O’Dell’s
favorite students.
1
It started when Mr. O’Dell announced how students could get a good grade in his
class—not by memorizing a lot of facts but by
thinking. e students stared at him,
either wondering what he was talking about or else marveling at the fringe of reddish
brown hair surrounding his shiny bald head. . . .
2
Mr. O’Dell had answered by asking another question. “What common substance can
take the form of a liquid, a solid, or a gas?”
3
Nobody answered. e class just sat there, waiting for Mr. O’Dell to explain what
that had to do with anything. en Chip got it. Mr. O’Dell meant that he was likely to
throw out questions about things that weren’t in the book and expect students to figure
out the answers for themselves. To Chip the question seemed more like a riddle.
4
e first liquid Chip thought of was water, and then he thought of ice. Ice is a solid.
And when water gets super hot, it turns to steam. He wasn’t sure if steam was a gas or
not, but when nobody else spoke, Chip blurted out, “Water?”
5
Aer that Chip could tell that Mr. O’Dell liked him. Chip liked him too—at least
most of the time. In English, social studies, and math, Mr. O’Dell was just an average
teacher. But the minute the lesson turned to science, Mr. O’Dell practically exploded
with energy and enthusiasm.
6
e best part about science class was the field trips. e principal usually allowed
outdoor field trips only once or twice a semester, but Mr. O’Dell had special permission
to take his class once a month to a big vacant lot down the street to study biology
“in the field.” Kate had told Chip that Mr. O’Dell had once taught in college and had
7
Page 2GO ON
Session 1
Read this story. Then answer questions 1 through 7.
written a book on field biology. She figured that was the reason he got special
privileges.
Chip quickly discovered that what Mr. O’Dell called field biology was what he had
been doing all his life: paying attention to other living things. Chip had favorites—
ducks and turtles, for example, and lightning bugs. But Mr. O’Dell seemed to be
interested in every living creature. Once when a student pointed out an anthill,
Mr. O’Dell put his nose down so close to watch that Chip expected an ant to climb
right onto it and march up through the freckles to stare back at him through his gold-
rimmed glasses. Another time, Mr. O’Dell had the whole class sit cross-legged in a
circle to watch a chameleon change from brown to bright green. While they waited still
and quiet, they got to see it let down a flap of bright red skin under its chin to attract
insects. Anyone who wasn’t paying close attention missed the important moment when
the lizard flicked out its long tongue and whisked a fly back into its mouth.
8
Mr. O’Dell had the students take detailed notes on each animal or insect they were
observing. He also encouraged them to make sketches of what they saw. e trips with
Mr. O’Dell had taught Chip a different way of looking at things.
9
Out where Chip lived there wasn’t a lot of wildlife in the plowed fields, which were
heavily pesticided. But quite a few interesting creatures still lived in the drainage
ditches and the high grass along the banks. When Luther first came to live with his
grandparents, Chip had showed him where to find the birds’ nests built so low to the
ground that you could look right in and watch the eggs hatch. He’d also taught Luther
—a boy raised in New York City who knew nothing about Florida wildlife—how to tell
the difference between slow land turtles and snapping turtles. For one thing, if you
didn’t catch a snapping turtle just right, it could give you a bite that really hurt. . . .
10
Mr. O’Dell never talked about an animal’s feelings, but about its purpose, and why it
ought to be right where it was, doing whatever it was doing. Like the day aer Luther
got mad at Chip, when Chip brought a blue skink11 to class. Mr. O’Dell was as excited as
if it was a baby dinosaur. In about five minutes he had everybody in the class involved
in trying to find out more about skinks. But when the class ended, he’d called Chip up
to his desk and said, “Now, you’ll take this skink back and put it right where you found
it, won’t you?” . . .
11
Mr. O’Dell looked at the skink, then at Chip. “If somebody put you in a car and
drove you far away and dumped you out, would that be okay with you?”
12
“Probably not,” Chip admitted. “I’d want to go home.”13
Page 3Session 1
GO ON
_______________________
11sskkiinnkk:: a type of lizard
“Most critters do,” Mr. O’Dell pointed out. “ings do happen that displace us from
our homes. Humans are pretty good at adapting to new locations, but even for them it’s
stressful. And some creatures can’t manage it at all. If you take them out of their
natural environment, they just die.” . . .
14
Chip took the skink back to the drainage ditch where he’d found it and let it go.15
Page 4GO ON
Session 1
How does Chip change as a result of the way Mr. O’Dell teaches?
A He improves his memory.
B He becomes confused.
C He develops enthusiasm.
D He loses confidence.
Read this sentence from paragraph 8.
OOnnccee wwhheenn aa ssttuuddeenntt ppooiinntteedd oouutt aann aanntthhiillll,, MMrr.. OO’’DDeellll ppuutt hhiiss nnoossee ddoowwnn ssoo cclloossee ttoo
wwaattcchh tthhaatt CChhiipp eexxppeecctteedd aann aanntt ttoo cclliimmbb rriigghhtt oonnttoo iitt aanndd mmaarrcchh uupp tthhrroouugghh tthhee
ffrreecckklleess ttoo ssttaarree bbaacckk aatt hhiimm tthhrroouugghh hhiiss ggoolldd--rriimmmmeedd ggllaasssseess..
What tone does this sentence add to the story?
A a curious tone
B a humorous tone
C an anxious tone
D an observant tone
How do the details about Mr. O’Dell in paragraph 11 support a central idea of the story?
A ey show his fascination with blue skinks.
B ey show his appreciation for living animals.
C ey show his excitement about baby dinosaurs.
D ey show his passion for reading animals’ feelings.
1
2
3
Page 5Session 1
GO ON
Which word is a synonym for “displace” as it is used in paragraph 14?
A guard
B return
C change
D remove
In the story, how does the author develop Chip’s point of view of Mr. O’Dell?
A by mentioning that Chip is one of Mr. O’Dell’s favorite students
B by showing Chip answering a tough question that Mr. O’Dell asks
C by explaining why Mr. O’Dell has special field trip privileges
D by describing events that make an impression on Chip
How do Chip’s explorations in the outdoors influence him?
A ey lead to his initial interest in a variety of local animals.
B ey make it difficult for him to understand Luther’s point of view.
C ey prompt him to discover wildlife in plowed fields.
D ey enable him to show Luther how to handle a skink.
4
5
6
Page 6GO ON
Session 1
Which detail would be mmoosstt important to include in a summary of “Excerpt from
e Last
Wild Place”?
A Mr. O’Dell treats students differently based on their interests.
B Mr. O’Dell teaches science better than he teaches other subjects.
C Mr. O’Dell values the purpose and habitat of every animal.
D Mr. O’Dell previously taught in college and wrote a book.
7
Page 7Session 1
GO ON
““SSuussaann BBuuttcchheerr”” ffrroomm
LLaaddiieess FFiirrsstt::
4400 DDaarriinngg AAmmeerriiccaann WWoommeenn WWhhoo WWeerree
SSeeccoonndd ttoo NNoonnee
by Elizabeth Cody Kimmel
e Iditarod is one of the toughest races in the world, and it takes place over some of
the most challenging landscape on the planet. It is a race by dogsled that follows a route
over a thousand miles long through the wilderness of Alaska. No woman has
triumphed more consistently over this relentless challenge than Susan Butcher.
1
Born in Massachusetts in 1954, Butcher was drawn as a child to the wilderness and
to the animals that filled it. Her parents were interested in boats and sailing, but
Butcher seems to have been born with a passion for the outdoors not shared with
family members. When she was eight, she wrote a two-sentence essay that read: “I hate
the city. I love the country.”
2
Two pet Siberian huskies kindled her interest in dogsled racing. Butcher had always
known she would spend her life working in some way with animals. When she decided
to move to Colorado at age 17 to become a professional dog musher, or driver, her
parents were less than pleased. ey would have preferred their daughter go to college.
But Butcher had always been a child who knew what she wanted to do, and did it. She
moved with her two huskies to Colorado in 1972. In her spare time she studied
veterinary medicine at a nearby university, focusing on the care of dogs. In 1973, she
heard about the first Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race being organized in Alaska.
Everything about Alaska, especially the pioneer-style living its wilderness offered,
appealed to Butcher. In 1975, she found work at the University of Alaska and moved to
Fairbanks. At the same time, she began to put together a team of dogs to enter in the
Iditarod.
3
Page 8GO ON
Session 1
Read this article. Then answer questions 8 through 14.
Training for the Iditarod encompasses a wide scope of activities. To begin with, both
the musher of the dogsled and the entire team of dogs must be in top physical
condition. Both Susan and her dogs trained up to 16 hours a day, seven days a week.
ey had to develop the physical stamina they would need to endure over two weeks of
peak performance under challenging and sometimes dangerous conditions. Training to
work with each other is also a crucial part of preparation for the Iditarod.
4
e musher must have faith in each and every dog on her team, and most important,
she must have a lead dog whom she can trust with her life. A lead dog must be able to
assert himself over the other dogs and make snap judgments on the trail if an obstacle
suddenly looms into view. And a lead dog must be able to make decisions even if they
go against what the musher is commanding. One of Butcher’s lead dogs refused to turn
le on a river path early on in the training. It was only aer the dog pulled Butcher and
the team in the opposite direction that the reason became clear. e portion of trail to
the le was a flimsy snow bridge that would have collapsed under the weight of the
team, sending dogs, sled, and musher into the river. e lead dog’s instinct had been
absolutely correct. To cultivate and recognize this instinct, Butcher bonded with her
dogs and treated them as friends, family, and professional athletes. In her earliest years
training for the Iditarod, Butcher explains that living in the wilderness to train, the
dogs were not just friends to her, they were her only friends at all.
5
By the time Butcher was ready to enter her first Iditarod in 1978, the race was still
largely the domain of men. Only three women had previously completed the course.
Butcher was not welcomed with open arms, but she chose to ignore the resistance from
the male mushers. She finished the race in 19th place, which was an extremely
respectable showing for a newcomer, man or woman, and made her the first woman to
place in the top 20.
6
Butcher ran the Iditarod every year aer that, and by 1984 she had placed second in
two races. She now felt she was good enough to win the Iditarod outright, but in 1985
her dreams were cut violently short. Early on in the race she and her team came upon a
pregnant and hungry moose, which charged the dogs, attacking them with its massive
hooves. Two of Butcher’s dogs were killed, and many others badly hurt. Butcher chose
to withdraw from the race to tend to her dogs’ injuries, leaving another woman,
Libby Riddles, to become the first woman to win the Iditarod.
7
Page 9Session 1
GO ON
In 1986, it was Butcher’s turn. ough two of her dogs fell through the ice while
they were leading the sled over a river, Butcher was able to pull the dogs to safety and
continue the race. Sleeping only a few hours each night, she overtook other teams one
at a time, until she had taken the lead. Eleven days aer starting, Butcher and her team
crossed the finish line in first place. She had not only won the race, she had also set a
new speed record. Nine years aer running her first Iditarod as a “rookie,”
Susan Butcher had now earned the respect and admiration of almost every other
musher, male and female alike.
8
Page 10GO ON
Session 1
What is mmoosstt lliikkeellyy the author’s purpose in paragraph 1?
A to demonstrate Susan Butcher’s significant contribution to women’s sports
B to introduce the relationship between Susan Butcher and her dogs
C to explain that more men than women compete in the Iditarod
D to convey the challenges of the Iditarod race
What do the details in paragraph 4 explain about the Iditarod?
A why more men than women enter the Iditarod
B why Susan Butcher had to withdraw from the Iditarod
C how much preparation is needed to compete in the Iditarod
D how Susan Butcher selected her team of dogs for the Iditarod
What is the effect of the author’s use of the word “must” four times in the sentences at the
beginning of paragraph 5?
A It emphasizes that the ideas in these sentences are critical for the race.
B It demonstrates that the ideas in these sentences reflect what the
musher believes.
C It indicates that the ideas in these sentences are essentially the same.
D It shows that the ideas in these sentences are the only important traits.
8
9
10
Page 11Session 1
GO ON
Which claim by the author is mmoosstt strongly supported with evidence?
A “Two pet Siberian huskies kindled her interest in dogsled racing.”
(paragraph 3)
B “e musher must have faith in each and every dog on her team . . .”
(paragraph 5)
C “. . . the race was still largely the domain of men.” (paragraph 6)
D “In 1986, it was Butcher’s turn.” (paragraph 8)
Which quotation bbeesstt portrays Susan Butcher’s relationship with her dogs?
A “. . . she studied veterinary medicine at a nearby university, focusing on the
care of dogs.” (paragraph 3)
B “. . . both the musher of the dogsled and the entire team of dogs must be in
top physical condition.” (paragraph 4)
C “. . . Butcher bonded with her dogs and treated them as friends, family, and
professional athletes.” (paragraph 5)
D “. . . Butcher was able to pull the dogs to safety and continue the race.”
(paragraph 8)
Which statement bbeesstt expresses the relationship between paragraph 3 and paragraph 8?
A Paragraph 3 provides a summary, and paragraph 8 lists details.
B Paragraph 3 explains a cause, and paragraph 8 reveals effects.
C Paragraph 3 describes goals, and paragraph 8 presents an outcome.
D Paragraph 3 identifies problems, and paragraph 8 explains a solution.
11
12
13
Page 12GO ON
Session 1
Which detail would be mmoosstt important to include in a summary of the article?
A “. . . Butcher was drawn as a child to the wilderness and to the animals that
filled it.” (paragraph 2)
B “Training for the Iditarod encompasses a wide scope of activities.”
(paragraph 4)
C “e portion of trail to the le was a flimsy snow bridge that would have
collapsed . . .” (paragraph 5)
D “She had not only won the race, she had also set a new speed record.”
(paragraph 8)
14
Page 13Session 1
GO ON


_______________________
11vvaauuddeevviillllee:: a type of live entertainment that was popular in the early 1900s
is played by touching the strings with a steel bar or some hard object. Although it’s not
clear who invented the steel guitar style, legend has it that the first person to develop
this technique was Hawaiian schoolboy Joseph Kekuku. He discovered the sound while
walking along a railroad track strumming his guitar with a metal bolt that he found
along the tracks.
In country and bluegrass music, the band plays stringed instruments like the guitar,
banjo, fiddle, stand-up bass, and mandolin, but did you know that years ago, a band
might play these same instruments made out of gourds? Gourds are hard-shelled,
round-shaped fruits. During the Great Depression, people couldn’t afford store-bought
instruments so they made their own. . . .
8
WWiinndd IInnssttrruummeennttss
Just like percussion and strings, most wind instruments evolved from much older
folk instruments. e misnice is a bagpipe-like instrument made out of the skin of a
goat. In Europe, references to the misnice are found as early as the ninth century. e
misnice was found in North Africa and in somewhat different forms in Eastern Europe
(Serbia, Hungary, Ukraine, and elsewhere). . . .
9
e zurna, also known as the surna, is an instrument from Islamic areas including
Iran, Mesopotamia, and Syria. e popularity of the zurna quickly spread through
areas conquered by the Arabs. e Arabs first used it in military bands, and later used it
to greet important persons, mark the beginnings of pilgrimages, and in other
important ceremonies. Today the zurna still exists as a folk instrument used mainly in
festive village music in Islamic areas, as well as Greece, Cyprus, and Armenia. e
modern day version of the zurna is the oboe, which is a staple of any symphony
orchestra.
10
If you don’t have any instruments at all, and you can’t make one, you can always
whistle. Whistling is a way to use your vocal cords as a musical instrument. Just put
your lips together and blow, and you can take that song with you anywhere you go.
11
Page 28GO ON
Session 1
What does the word “precision” mean as it is used in paragraph 3?
A frequency
B force
C accuracy
D speed
What idea do paragraphs 7 and 8 share?
A Stringed instruments are characterized by natural materials.
B Some instruments are more popular and appealing than others.
C New instruments can be created from everyday materials.
D Even simple instruments can produce beautiful music.
What does the word “version” mean as it is used in paragraph 10?
A a special edition
B a specific performance
C a related form of an earlier object
D an example from a variety of types
29
30
31
Page 29Session 1
GO ON
How is paragraph 10 mmaaiinnllyy structured?
A by comparing and contrasting ideas
B by presenting events in time order
C by stating causes and effects
D by detailing solutions to problems
Which quotation bbeesstt conveys a central idea of the article?
A “Many of the instruments we know and play today, like the piano, the
guitar, and the oboe, evolved from these older instruments.” (paragraph 1)
B “e fact that marimba songs were well liked by Americans shows the
increased exposure the public had to foreign styles of music.” (paragraph 4)
C “During the Great Depression, people couldn’t afford store-bought
instruments so they made their own.” (paragraph 8)
D “Whistling is a way to use your vocal cords as a musical instrument.”
(paragraph 11)
What point of view is the author mmoosstt lliikkeellyy expressing in paragraph 11?
A Musical instruments should be made available to everyone.
B e ability to make music is widespread.
C Everyone should involve themselves with music.
D Listening to music brings great joy.
32
33
34
Page 30GO ON
Session 1
Which sentence would be mmoosstt important to include in a summary of the article?
A Many musical instruments have been made by using simple
available materials.
B Percussion instruments make sounds when struck, shaken, or scraped.
C Guitars are used by Hawaiian, country, rock, and bluegrass musicians.
D e zurna was first used in military bands and to greet important persons.
35
Page 31Session 1
STOP
Grade 7
2022
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
March 29–31, 2022

“Unearthing the Arabia” by Lynn Rymarz, Highlights, March 2016. Copyright © 2016 by Highlights for Children, Inc. Used with
permission of Highlights for Children, Inc. via Copyright Clearance Center.
“Persistent” from Words with Wings by Nikki Grimes. Copyright © 2013 by Nikki Grimes. Published by WordSong. Used with permission of
Boyds Mill Kane Press via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from The Strictest School in the World: Being the Tale of a Clever Girl, a Rubber Boy and a Collection of Flying Machines, Mostly
Broken by Howard Whitehouse. Used with permission of Kids Can Press via Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by Questar Assessment Inc., 5550 Upper 147th
Street West, Minneapolis, MN 55124. Copyright © 2022 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 2
Session 2
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some suggestions to help you do your best:
• Be sure to read all the directions carefully.
• Most questions will make sense only when you read the whole passage. You may read
the passage more than once to answer a question. When a question includes a quotation
from a passage, be sure to keep in mind what you learned from reading the whole
passage. You may need to review both the quotation and the passage in order to answer
the question correctly.
• Read each question carefully and think about the answer before writing your response.
• In writing your responses, be sure to
– clearly organize your writing and express what you have learned;
– accurately and completely answer the questions being asked;
– support your responses with examples or details from the text; and
– write in complete sentences using correct spelling, grammar, capitalization,
and punctuation.
• For the last question in this test book, you may plan your writing on the Planning Page
provided, but do NOT write your final answer on this Planning Page. Writing on this
Planning Page will NOT count toward your final score. Write your final answer on the
lined response pages provided.
Page 1Session 2
UUnneeaarrtthhiinngg tthhee
AArraabbiiaa
by Lynn Rymarz
e
Arabia’s paddle wheels churned the muddy waters of the Missouri River as it
made its way upriver on September 5, 1856. e white wooden steamboat carried
200 tons of cargo, 130 passengers, and 1 mule.
1
Men, women, and children were headed west to new frontier towns along the
Missouri River. All of their personal belongings were onboard. Below deck, in the cargo
hold, wooden crates and barrels filled with new merchandise waited to be delivered to
the towns’ settlers.
2
As passengers sat down to dinner in the boat’s dining room, the
Arabia rounded the
river’s bend outside of Kansas City, Missouri. Without warning, the steamboat struck a
submerged tree, causing a gaping hole in the oak hull.
3
Water gushed in and immediately the boat started sinking. Passengers screamed as
water flooded over the deck and the boat keeled to one side. Chairs and stools tumbled
into the Missouri River. Children began sliding off the boat as frantic parents rushed to
save them. Several men pushed the one lifeboat into the water and rowed scared
passengers to shore. People living along the river also helped with the rescue. All the
passengers were saved, but the precious cargo and the mule were lost as the
Arabia sank
to the bottom of the Missouri River. ere the steamboat remained in the mud for
132 years.
4
SSeeaarrcchhiinngg ffoorr TTrreeaassuurree
In 1985, Dave Hawley heard a story about sunken steamboats buried with treasure.
He persuaded his brother Greg, their father Bob, and family friend Jerry Mackey to go
treasure hunting. Sunken steamboats loaded with gold, silver, and valuable cargo could
make them rich!
5
Treasure hunting had been a big part of the Hawleys’ family life. Growing up in
Missouri, Dave and Greg had dug in gold mines, explored the banks of the Missouri
River, and searched for ghost towns.
6
Page 2GO ON
Session 2
Read this article. Then answer questions 36 through 38.
e four men began by visiting libraries, courthouses, and the National Archives in
Washington, D.C. ey searched for clues about lost steamboats rich in cargo. Records
showed that 289 steamboats had sunk on the Missouri River. ey narrowed their hunt
to 10.
7
Over time, the Missouri River had changed its course, and many of these sunken
steamboats now appeared to be buried beneath dry land. e men knocked on people’s
doors asking permission to search their fields. Aer countless miles and three years,
their search for nine steamboats le them empty-handed.
8
But one sunken steamboat remained: the
Arabia.9
FFiinnddiinngg tthhee
AArraabbiiaa
Maps revealed that the
Arabia lay buried in a Kansas cornfield on Norman Sortor’s
property. Sortor had heard stories about the sunken steamboat that had been passed
down for generations in his family. ree other treasure-hunting teams had tried to
reach it but failed. So when the four men asked Sortor for permission to search on his
land, he warned, “You can try to dig the
Arabia, but you won’t reach her. No one else
has.”
10
e men were not discouraged. ey agreed to give the landowner a percentage of
any artifacts they found. en they set out to find the steamboat. Aer hiking through
rows of corn with his magnetometer, a device used to find metal, Dave got a reading. It
was the
Arabia!
11
But they had to wait until the corn was harvested before they could stake out the
boat’s dimensions. Finally, they began digging. When they hit water, pumps were
needed to remove it. Sometimes using heavy equipment, the four men dug through
sand and mud—deeper and deeper. Eighteen days later, one of their shovels unearthed
part of a paddle wheel.
12
ee
AArraabbiiaa EEmmeerrggeess
e paddle wheel was just the beginning. Within days, the first artifact appeared: a
worn rubber shoe with “Goodyears Rubber Co., 1849” stamped on the bottom. e
men kept digging and more personal belongings emerged from the muddy ruins:
clothes, books, toys, and tools. ey discovered wooden crates and barrels full of beaver
hats; dishware and hardware; brightly colored fabric; fancy buttons; and bottles of
spices, medicines, and sweet pickles—which were still good enough to eat. ey even
found the skeleton of the mule, still bridled and saddled.
13
Page 3Session 2
GO ON
Each discovery revealed more about the men, women, and children who headed
west. “Excavating the
Arabia was like shaking hands with the pioneers,” Greg wrote in
his book. Although their adventure had not led them to gold and silver, it had led them
to treasures beyond their “wildest dreams.”
14
ey had unearthed 200 tons of artifacts, discovering more than 100,000 items—the
country’s biggest collection of pre-Civil War artifacts ever found. And because the
cargo had existed in an oxygen-free environment, the washed-off items looked new. But
they needed preserving, which would require more money than these adventurers had.
15
ee RReeaall TTrreeaassuurree
e men faced the decision of what to do with the
Arabia’s precious cargo. If they
sold the priceless artifacts, they would be rich. But they knew they couldn’t sell them.
As Greg later said, “e most priceless thing discovered aboard the
Arabia was not the
cargo, but the story it told.”
16
e men decided to create the Arabia Steamboat Museum in Kansas City, Missouri,
and showcase the lost treasures. Norman Sortor also chose to have his share of the
artifacts remain with the others in the museum. He kept just a few for his family. e
Arabia’s story, once buried in the mud for 132 years, is now open to the public for all to
enjoy.
17
Page 4GO ON
Session 2
In paragraph 10 of “Unearthing the
Arabia,” why does the author include the information
about property owner Norman Sortor? Use ttwwoo details from the article to support your
response.
36
Page 5Session 2
GO ON
How does the author of “Unearthing the
Arabia” support the claim that treasure hunting was a
lifelong interest for the Hawley family? Use ttwwoo details from the article to support your
response.
37
Page 6GO ON
Session 2
In the article “Unearthing the
Arabia,” what is the meaning of the final heading “e Real
Treasure”? Use ttwwoo details from the article to support your response.
38
Page 7Session 2
GO ON
5
10
15
20
““PPeerrssiisstteenntt”” ffrroomm
WWoorrddss wwiitthh WWiinnggss
by Nikki Grimes
Teacher keeps an eye on me
all week.
I give him no reason
to call me aside,
but he does.
“Talk to me, Gabby,” he says.
“Tell me what’s wrong.
I can see you’re not happy.”
I’d argue but my sigh
gives me away.
“I miss daydreaming.”
“en daydream!” says Mr. Spicer,
confusing me.
“But you’re always telling me
to stop daydreaming!
You and my mom.”
Teacher taps his top lip
like a door the right words
are hiding behind.
“Dreams are great things, Gabby,”
he finally says.
“e best thinkers,
writers, inventors in the world
allow their thoughts
Page 8GO ON
Session 2
Read this poem. Then answer questions 39 and 40.
25
30
35
40
to carry them away,
now and then.
Take the Wright brothers.
We wouldn’t have airplanes
if they hadn’t dreamed of them, first.
Still, sometimes you have to
slide your daydreams
in a drawer
and let them wait until later,
like aer I’m done
teaching a lesson
you need to learn.
Got it?”
I nod, wondering if
the Wright brothers
knew anything about
bringing daydreams in
for a landing.
Page 9Session 2
GO ON
How do Gabby’s feelings change during the course of the poem “Persistent”? Use ttwwoo details
from the poem to support your response.
39
Page 10GO ON
Session 2
In “Persistent,” how do the phrases “carry them away” (line 25) and “bringing daydreams in for
a landing” (lines 41–42) relate to each other? Use ttwwoo details from the poem to support your
response.
40
Page 11Session 2
GO ON
is story is set in the late 1800s.
EExxcceerrpptt ffrroomm
ee SSttrriicctteesstt SScchhooooll iinn
tthhee WWoorrlldd:: BBeeiinngg tthhee TTaallee ooff aa CClleevveerr GGiirrll,,
aa RRuubbbbeerr BBooyy aanndd aa CCoolllleeccttiioonn ooff FFllyyiinngg
MMaacchhiinneess,, MMoossttllyy BBrrookkeenn
by Howard Whitehouse
Everyone dreams about flying. Soaring above the clouds, banking your wings11 to
make graceful curves through the air, swooping like a hawk from great heights.
Jumping off the toolshed roof. Spending a week with a bandage round your head. Being
told how lucky you were not to break your neck.
1
Everyone dreams about flying. Emmaline did.2
Emmaline Cayley was a pioneering scientist. She had declared this when she turned
eleven. She was a leader in the field of aeronautics,22 as she would tell anyone who
would listen; at least, she would be one day. e girls she knew said that Emmaline was
mad and that she probably still believed in fairies. Emmaline didn’t care what other
girls thought. She didn’t care about dolls or new dresses or tea parties; she cared about
aeronautics. She was an aviatrix.33 By her thirteenth birthday, Emmaline had decided
that she was going to invent a flying machine. at was more than a year ago in
Calcutta, India, where she had been brought up.
3
Now she was in England, waiting to go to boarding school.4
Emmaline sat on a fallen tree, looking out over a valley. It was smooth grassland
with no rocks, no trees or tangly bushes and no patches of bog to get sucked into.
Emmaline considered it a perfect place for an experiment with flight. What she actually
thought was, “is would be a fine place to try out a flying machine—if I had one—and
could get somebody (but not me) to sit in it and see what happened when it le the
ground.”
5
Page 12GO ON
Session 2
Read this story. Then answer questions 41 through 43.
_______________________
11bbaannkkiinngg yyoouurr wwiinnggss:: turning by positioning one wing of the plane higher than the other
22aaeerroonnaauuttiiccss:: the science of air travel
33aavviiaattrriixx:: female airplane pilot
44pplluummmmeett:: fall fast
e truth is that Emmaline was afraid of flying. She didn’t admit this to herself,
however. She told herself that if she were to plummet44 to her doom, then all her
experimental knowledge as a pioneer in aeronautics would die with her. Emmaline
thought this would be a tragedy indeed. . . .
6
Emmaline’s great-great-uncle, Sir George Cayley, had tried inventing flying
machines long ago. As a boy he’d made model gliders, studied birds’ wings and
conducted strange experiments with wind tunnels. But he hadn’t built an actual,
full-sized flying machine until 1849, when he was much older. He had ordered a boy
to sit in the machine. Sir George was seventy-six at the time, so nobody felt he was
letting anyone down by not flying it himself (when you are ancient, you can get away
with a lot). e contraption worked as Sir George had hoped, sailing through the air a
hundred yards or thereabouts, and nobody was injured.
7
A few years later, Cayley tried again with a bigger, better cra. is time, Sir George
“volunteered” his coachman, a light skinny man (just the type he needed) to fly the
glider. A team of big, brawny farmhands from Cayley’s estate hauled it up a hill above a
valley known as Brompton Dale. e machine was a marvel. e lads pushed, and it
rose in the air, soared two hundred yards and landed in a meadow with a splintering
sickening crash. e coachman, John Appleby, tottered from the wreckage, limped back
up the hill and resigned on the spot. . . .
8
Emmaline knew there was a simple moral to the story. Get somebody else to sit in
the pilot’s seat.
9
Page 13Session 2
GO ON
In paragraph 3, what is mmoosstt lliikkeellyy the author’s purpose for including details about the girls
Emmaline knows? Use ttwwoo details from the story to support your response.
41
Page 14GO ON
Session 2
In “Excerpt from
e Strictest School in the World,” how does the shi between paragraphs 6
and 7 contribute to the story? Use ttwwoo details from the story to support your response.
42
Page 15Session 2
GO ON

e poem “Persistent” and the story “Excerpt from
e Strictest School in the World ” convey a
similar theme. What theme is shared in the poem and the story? How do the poet and the
author develop this theme in each text? Use details from bbootthh the poem and the story to
support your response.
In your response, be sure to
identify a theme that is shared in “Persistent” and “Excerpt from
e Strictest School in
the World ”
explain how the poet and the author develop this theme in each text
use details from bbootthh the poem and the story to support your response
43
Page 17Session 2
GO ON
Page 18Session 2
S
T
O
P
Grade 7
2022
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
March 29–31, 2022
Multiple Choice Questions
Percentage of Students Who
Answered Correctly
(P-Value)
Average
Points
Earned
P-Value
(Average Points Earned
÷ Total Possible Points)
1 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.3 Reading 0.81
2 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.4 Reading 0.36
3 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.2 Reading 0.71
4 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.7.4 Reading 0.76
5 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.6 Reading 0.61
6 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.3 Reading 0.69
7 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.2 Reading 0.81
8 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.6 Reading 0.56
9 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.3 Reading 0.88
10 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.4 Reading 0.72
11 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.8 Reading 0.62
12 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.3 Reading 0.85
13 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.5 Reading 0.64
14 Multiple Choice D 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.2 Reading 0.49
29 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.7.4 Reading 0.7
30 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.3 Reading 0.4
31 Multiple Choice C 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.L.7.4 Reading 0.5
32 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.5 Reading 0.61
33 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.2 Reading 0.71
34 Multiple Choice B 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.6 Reading 0.59
35 Multiple Choice A 1 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.2 Reading 0.82
36 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.3 Writing to Sources 1.54 0.77
37 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.8 Writing to Sources 1.42 0.71
38 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RI.7.4 Writing to Sources 1.46 0.73
39 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.3 Writing to Sources 1.52 0.76
40 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.4 Writing to Sources 1.31 0.65
41 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.6 Writing to Sources 1.49 0.75
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2022 English Language Arts Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 7 Released Questions
Session 2
Constructed Response Questions
Session 1
Question Type Key Points Standard Subscore
42 Constructed Response 2 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.5 Writing to Sources 1.38 0.69
43 Constructed Response 4 CCSS.ELA-Literacy.RL.7.2 Writing to Sources 2.06 0.52
*This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question on the 2022 operational ELA test. However, each constructed-response question
measures proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards. For example, two-point and four-point constructed-response questions
require students to first conduct the analyses described in the mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on writing standards. To gain greater insight into the
measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please refer to the rubrics shown in the Educator Guides.