New York State administered the English Language Arts
Tests in April 2024 and is making approximately 75% of the
questions from these tests available for review and use.New York State Testing Program
Grade 8
English Language Arts Test
Released Questions
2024
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program Grades
4–8 English Language Arts
Released Questions from 2024 Exams
Background
As in past years, SED is releasing large portions of the 2024 NYS Grades 3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics
test materials for review, discussion, and use.
For 2024, included in these released materials are at least 75 percent of the test questions that appeared on the
2024 tests (including all constructed-response questions) that counted toward students’ scores. Additionally, SED is
providing information about the released passages; the associated text complexity for each passage; and a map that
details what learning standards each released question measures and the correct response to each question. These
released materials will help students, families, educators, and the public better understand the tests and the New
York State Education Department’s expectations for students.
Understanding ELA Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards in
English Language Arts. These questions ask students to analyze different aspects of a given text, including central
idea, style elements, character and plot development, and vocabulary. Almost all questions, including vocabulary
questions, will be answered correctly only if the student comprehends and makes use of the whole passage.
For multiple-choice questions, students select the correct response from four answer choices. Multiple-choice
questions assess reading standards in a variety of ways. Some ask students to analyze aspects of text or vocabulary.
Many questions require students to combine skills. For example, questions may ask students to identify a segment of
text that best supports the central idea. To answer these questions correctly, a student must first comprehend the
central idea and then show understanding of how that idea is supported. Questions tend to require more than rote
recall or identification.
Two-Credit Constructed-Response Questions
Two-credit constructed-response questions are designed to assess New York State P–12 Reading and Language
Standards. These are single questions in which a student uses textual evidence to support his or her answer to an
inferential question. These questions ask the student to make an inference (a claim, position, or conclusion) based on
their analysis of the passage, and then provide two pieces of text-based evidence to support their answer.
The purpose of the two-credit constructed-response questions is to assess a student’s ability to comprehend and
analyze text. In responding to these questions, students are expected to write in complete sentences. Responses
require no more than three complete sentences. The rubric used for evaluating two-credit constructed-response
questions can be found in the grade-level Educator Guides at https://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/
grades-3-8-ela-math-and-science-test-manuals.
Four-Credit Constructed-Response Questions
Four-credit constructed-response questions are designed to measure a student’s ability to write from sources.
Questions that measure Writing from Sources prompt students to communicate a clear and coherent analysis of one
or two texts. The comprehension and analysis required by each four-credit response is directly related to grade-
specific reading standards. Student responses are evaluated on the degree to which they meet grade-level writing and
language expectations. This evaluation is made by using a rubric that incorporates the demands of grade-specific
New York State P–12 Reading and Language Standards.
The integrated nature of the standards for ELA and literacy requires that students are evaluated across the strands
(Reading, Writing, and Language) with longer pieces of writing, such as those prompted by the four-credit
constructed-response questions. The rubric used for evaluating four-credit constructed-response questions can be
found in the grade-level Educator Guides at https://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/grades-3-8-ela-math-and-
science-test-manuals.
New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment to the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards for English Language Arts is intended
to identify the analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. However, some questions measure
proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards. For
example, two-credit and four-credit constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the analyses
described in the mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on writing
standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please refer to
the rubrics.
These Released Questions Do Not Comprise a “Mini Test”
To ensure it is possible to develop future tests, some content must remain secure. This document is not intended
to be representative of the entire test, to show how operational tests look, or to provide information about how
teachers should administer the test; rather, its purpose is to provide an overview of how the test reflects the
demands of the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards.
The released questions do not represent the full spectrum of the standards assessed on the State tests, nor do they
represent the full spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in the classroom. It should not be
assumed that a particular standard will be measured by an identical question in future assessments.
2024 Grade 8 ELA Test Text Complexity Metrics for
Released Questions
Selecting high-quality, grade-appropriate passages requires both objective text
complexity metrics and expert judgment. For the Grades 3–8 assessments based on the
New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards for English Language Arts,
both quantitative and qualitative rubrics are used to determine the complexity of the
texts and their appropriate placement within a grade-level ELA exam.
Quantitative measures of text complexity are used to measure aspects of text
complexity that are difficult for a human reader to evaluate when examining a text.
These aspects include word frequency, word length, sentence length, and text cohesion.
These aspects are efficiently measured by computer programs. While quantitative text
complexity metrics are a helpful start, they are not definitive.
Qualitative measures are a crucial complement to quantitative measures. Using
qualitative measures of text complexity involves making an informed decision about the
difficulty of a text in terms of one or more factors discernible to a human reader
applying trained judgment to the task. To qualitatively determine the complexity of a
text, NYS educators use a rubric composed of five factors; four of these factors are
required and one factor is optional. The required criteria are: meaning, text structure,
language features, and knowledge demands. The optional factor, graphics, is used only
if a graphic appears in the text.
To make the final determination as to whether a text is at grade-level and thus
appropriate to be included on a Grades 3–8 assessment, New York State uses a two-step
review process, which is an industry best-practice. First, all prospective passages
undergo quantitative text complexity analysis using three text complexity measures. If
at least two of the three measures suggest that the passage is grade-appropriate, the
passage then moves to the second step, which is the qualitative review using the text-
complexity rubrics. Only passages that are determined appropriate by at least two of
three quantitative measures of complexity and are determined appropriate by the
qualitative measure of complexity are deemed appropriate for use on the exam.
Text Complexity Metrics for 2024 Grade 8 Passages
Passage Title Word
Count
Lexile
Flesch-Kincaid
ATOS
Qualitative
Review
Excerpt from Growing a Farmer 794 980 6.8 7.25 Appropriate
Excerpt from The Voyage of the Frog 1010 1200 7.8 5.98 Appropriate
Counting Giraffes 718 1050 8.7 8.28 Appropriate
Excerpt from Lydia Darragh’s Secret
Mission 767 910 7.7 6.81 Appropriate
PAIR - Excerpt from The Gold Hunters:
A Story of Life and Adventure in the
Hudson Bay Wilds
593 990 5.9 6.82 Appropriate
PAIR – “Only Gold” from Allegories
of Life 425 1050 7 7.9 Appropriate
New York State 2024 Quantitative Text Complexity Chart for Assessment and Curriculum
To determine if a text’s quantitative complexity is at the appropriate grade level, New
York State uses the table below. In cases where a text is excerpted from a large work,
only the complexity of the excerpt that students see on the test is measured, not the
large work, so it is possible that the complexity of a book might be above or below grade
level, but the text used on the assessment is at grade level. Because the measurement
of text complexity is inexact, quantitative measures of complexity are defined by grade
band rather than by individual grade level and then paired with the qualitative review by
an educator.
Grade
Band ATOS
Degrees of
Reading
Power Flesch-Kincaid
The Lexile
Framework
Reading
Maturity SourceRater
2nd –3rd 2.75 – 5.14 42 – 54 1.98 – 5.34 420 – 820 3.53 – 6.13 0.05 – 2.48
4th –5th 4.97 – 7.03 52 – 60 4.51 – 7.73 740 – 1010 5.42 – 7.92 0.84 – 5.75
6th –8th 7.00 – 9.98 57 – 67 6.51 – 10.34 925 – 1185 7.04 – 9.57 4.11 – 10.66
9th –10th 9.67 – 12.01 62 – 72 8.32 – 12.12 1050 – 1335 8.41 – 10.81 9.02 – 13.93
11th –12th 11.20 – 14.10 67 – 74 10.34 – 14.20 1185 – 1385 9.57 – 12.00 12.30 – 14.50
Source: Student Achievement Partners
Name: __________________________________________________GRADE 8 ELA SESSION 1New York State
Testing Program
GRADE 8 ELA SESSION 1English Language Arts Test
Session 1
Grade 8
Spring 2024
RELEASED QUESTIONS
Excerpt from Growing a Farmer by Kurt Timmermeister. Copyright © 2011 by Kurt Timmermeister. Published by W.W. Norton &
Company, Inc. Used with permission of W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. via Copyright Clearance Center.
From VOYAGE OF THE FROG by Gary Paulsen. Copyright © 1989 by Gary Paulsen. Reprinted by permission of Orchard Books, an
imprint of Scholastic Inc.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by NWEA, a division of HMH, 14720 Energy Way,
Apple Valley, MN 55124. Copyright © 2024 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1
Session 1
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some ideas to help you do your best:
• Read the whole passage before you answer the questions. Most questions will only make
sense after you read the whole passage.
• You might need to read the passage more than once to answer a question.
• Read each question carefully. Take your time.
• A question may include a quote from a passage. You might need to review both the
quote and the whole passage to answer the question.
When you write your answers
• make sure to answer the whole question;
• use examples or details from the text;
• write in complete sentences; and
• use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and punctuation.
Page 1Session 1
Excerpt from Growing a Farmer
by Kurt Timmermeister
I found an ad for a beekeeping supply house in the back of a Mother Earth News
magazine. e Brushy Mountain Bee Farm in North Carolina made beehives and sold
them through the mail. I ordered their catalogue and when it arrived I studied it
obsessively, choosing what I would need to begin my apiary.1
1
Intimidated by the many choices in the slim catalogue, I ordered the beginner’s kit.
Aer all, I was a beginner. It contained a hive box, lids, base and frames, together with
thick gauntlet gloves and that hat and veil from the photo in that vintage book. A hive tool
and a bee brush rounded out the kit. I eagerly awaited the shipment.
2
When the large box arrived from North Carolina, I spread the contents all out on the
floor of my humble chicken coop and began to assemble the pieces. Traditionally hive
boxes are painted white; I went with a deep barn-red. I wanted my hives to have a bit more
style, and I had a can le over from painting the outside of my house.
3
Also in the supply catalogue were advertisements for bee suppliers. ese were bee
farms located in the southern states that grew large colonies of bees and shipped them
north for beekeepers. I had my pick of suppliers from Alabama, Texas, South Carolina,
Georgia. All were a great distance from my home, but I chose a firm from Texas. I called
up and placed an order for a box of Italian bees, a subspecies of honeybees. Carniolan are
another subspecies of the honeybee used commonly in beekeeping, but I decided to go
with Italian bees because of the familiarity of their name.
4
e first box of bees arrived in relatively good condition. A percentage of the bees
were dead, but there were still many live bees in the box. e three-pound box that the
bees are shipped in is fairly small—six inches by eight inches by fieen—and contains
around three thousand bees. e two longest sides are open, covered with tight mesh to
keep the bees in but allow air to freely circulate. e other four sides are made of low-
quality wood, similar to old food crates. Within the sealed box is a smaller, much smaller,
box containing the queen. e bees are also given a tin can filled with sugar water to feed
them on their journey north.
5
Once I received the bees I proceeded to install them into my freshly painted hive. I
had read the books, spent time on setting up the hive and now I was ready to suit up and
start raising bees.
6
Page 14GO ON
Session 1
Read this article. Then answer questions 15 through 21.
____________________
1
apiary: a place where a person keeps bees
I failed. It was a cool spring that very first year and I got the bees out of the box and
onto the hive, but I couldn’t put the covering lid of the hive on because the bees had not
quickly entered the hive. Sadly, it began to rain that aernoon. Cool and rainy, not good
bee weather. Fearful of putting the lid on their apparently delicate bodies, I le the lid off.
My first decision in beekeeping turned out to be one of my worst. e next morning I
returned to the hive to find the bees all dead from the rain and cold. I would have to start
over quickly. . . .
7
e second year proved a tad more successful but was still a failure. e bees made it
to the farm, managed to colonize my hive and lived through the year. Not a drop of honey,
but still I was hooked, convinced that I could make a go of this. I liked the wardrobe, the
simple design of the wooden boxes, the smell of the beeswax foundations.
8
It would take a few years to get the basic skills necessary to keep a hive alive through
the spring, into the summer, so that I could capture some of the honey produced. Once I
achieved that level of success and tasted the result, the honey, all of the setbacks and
lessons were worth it.
9
Fresh, local honey is an amazing product. Not sticky, not cloyingly sweet, full of
delicate flavors. When I harvest the honey early in the summer it is light in color and light
in flavor, simple, the product of bees on clover and spring flowers. By late summer the
honey is dark brown, thick, complex and tastes of madrone trees and late flowers. Since
that first year of success, I have kept hives every year. I have never been too successful, but
I have always harvested enough honey for myself and my friends. In a good year, gallons
of honey fill plastic pails; in the lean years, a scant single bucket has to suffice.
10
Page 15Session 1
GO ON
What tone does the phrase “I studied it obsessively” in paragraph 1 establish in the article?
A It creates curiosity by encouraging readers to consider becoming beekeepers.
B It creates interest by showing the passion the author has for beekeeping.
C It creates seriousness by showing readers how compelling beekeeping can become.
D It creates suspense by suggesting how long the process is to become a beekeeper.
Paragraphs 2 through 4 develop the idea presented in paragraph 1 by
A explaining the reasons why the author finds beekeeping to be so complicated
B detailing a range of things about beekeeping that attracted the author to the hobby
C describing the steps the author followed to select the equipment for and build a beehive
D summarizing the experience that led the author to become a successful beekeeper
Paragraph 7 contributes to a central idea of the article by demonstrating that
A bees prefer the climate of southern states
B beekeeping requires learned knowledge and skills
C bees need several days to adjust to a new hive
D beekeeping is easier in areas that are hot and dry
15
16
17
Page 16GO ON
Session 1
Which sentence from the article best reveals the author’s enthusiasm for beekeeping as a hobby?
A “I wanted my hives to have a bit more style, and I had a can le over from painting the
outside of my house.” (paragraph 3)
B “Once I received the bees I proceeded to install them into my freshly painted hive.”
(paragraph 6)
C “Once I achieved that level of success and tasted the result, the honey, all of the setbacks
and lessons were worth it.” (paragraph 9)
D “I have never been too successful, but I have always harvested enough honey for myself
and my friends.” (paragraph 10)
In the author’s first two years of beekeeping, he was unable to
A get the bees to colonize his hive
B maintain a positive attitude
C keep the bees alive all year
D harvest any honey
How does the author’s attitude toward beekeeping change over the course of the article?
A It shis from excitement about the arrival of the beehive to defeat because of the dead
bees.
B It varies from confusion about how to proceed to contentment with the new hobby.
C It shis from eagerness to set up the apiary to embarrassment for his failures.
D It varies from strong interest in the new project to satisfaction with his accomplishments.
18
19
20
Page 17Session 1
GO ON
Which statement best expresses a central idea of the article?
A Beekeeping is challenging, yet it yields rewards.
B Few farmers are able to become successful beekeepers.
C Beekeeping requires the purchase of special, expensive equipment.
D Some farmers specialize in growing and selling bee colonies.
21
Page 18GO ON
Session 1
Fourteen-year-old David became lost at sea nine days ago when a huge storm blew his
sailboat, the Frog, far off course. Now, as he sails out of a bay, he experiences swells,
large waves that do not break, and knows that another storm is coming.
Excerpt from e Voyage of the Frog
by Gary Paulsen
e swells took the Frog immediately. ey were larger than when he had come in
and had a purpose to them, a rapid movement in spite of their size that almost triggered
alarm bells in David’s brain. He knew now that swells were telegraph systems, that they
came ahead of weather, and that large swells moving this hard and fast probably meant a
fair storm.
1
He thought of turning and going back into the bay to ride it out but decided against
it. e storm might be days getting to him, might not come at all, and he didn’t have much
food and fishing wasn’t going that well.
2
He did not know for certain where he was—except that it was somewhere down
along the Baja coast—but he knew that if he didn’t sail, didn’t move, didn’t use the wind
and sea he would never get home, and so he hated to just sit.
3
Once clear of the land he brought her1 around, up into the wind until she was
tacking2 northwest and making a solid six knots.3 She hit the swells fairly hard, the bow
slamming down on every fourth or fih one, but he held her, heeling well, under full sail
for seven hours, until just before dawn, when the storm came.
4
e swells grew in size at a regular rate, and the wind began to increase but started
slowly and worked up at a steady, growing pace. . . .
5
ere were waves coming now as well, on top of the swells, growing in chop and
intensity each moment. e Frog was slamming, making noise, but he held her angled up
into the wind and took it. Spray came over the bow and covered him, soaking him, but he
didn’t think he could leave again now and he took it as well—he would not let her do it
alone again, not let the sea have her again.
6
Dawn showed a mean gray sea heading up into leaden gray clouds and a wind that
moaned through the stays and rigging. Gusts hit now, like body blows taking her over, but
he worked the helm,4 let her ease up, held her off the wind again and kept the speed
between five and six knots, did not run from the storm but into it, used it, rolled with it,
absorbed it.
7
Page 19Session 1
GO ON
Read this story. Then answer questions 22 through 28.
e wind became worse. e waves grew until they were larger than the swells they
rode on, towering over him, burying the bow. More than once he was knocked off his feet
by a wall of water coming back over the side of the cabin but he never let go of the helm,
rose and took it again and again, held her through wave aer wave when they rose over
him, walls of water, mountains of water moving down on him, down on the Frog.
8
ey took it. All that day, slamming, rising, heeling, skidding, slamming down again,
up and over and down in the gale—at one point he snarled, growled at the wind and sea—
the helm in his gut, his arms aching, his legs on fire; they took it until late day when he
sensed a change, felt the storm was whipped. It had thrown everything it had at them and
was now passing.
9
Inside an hour the wind had lowered from a shriek and the tops of the waves weren’t
being blown over so hard. In another hour, just before dusk, the main force of the gale was
well past them, the waves settling and the wind becoming a good, steady force. He raised
the mainsail again to full size and found that she pointed higher yet into the wind, so that
he could go a little north of northwest and he was thinking that it felt good to be aimed
more for home, was thinking it would be wonderful if he could head straight north and
just get home before he ran out of food, however far it was, was thinking of his parents
and home and food and the wind and the sea and the storm and how he felt good that he
and the Frog had taken the storm the way they did together . . .
10
It was then that he saw the ship—a small, older ship, coming out of the dusk, aiming
almost at him but slightly off his bow, running with the wind and sea. Right there. A ship.
Right in front of him. She had been running without lights but as soon as the people on
deck saw him—there were three of them—they yelled and the lights came on and they
started to pass not a hundred yards away, the people waving and yelling and laughing.
11
For a moment he couldn’t say anything. He just didn’t think it would happen this
way. He didn’t know for certain how it would happen, but not this way. Not so sudden.
Suddenly he was saved. She was an old, very small coastal freighter but had been fixed up
and repainted and she carried an American flag above her bridge. . . .
12
He let go of the helm and waved with both arms, screamed, pointed at them and then
at himself and at last they got the message and he heard the engines in the freighter
rumble down to a stop west and slightly north of him.
13
He came about and let the Frog sail closer, came up into the wind and stopped about
thirty yards away, rising and settling on the waves and swells. He looked up at the people
on the rail.
14
“My name is David Alspeth,” he yelled. “I was driven out to sea in a storm. . . .”15
Page 20GO ON
Session 1
____________________
1
her: boats and ships are typically referred to using female pronouns
2
tacking: a sailing technique used to change the boat’s direction
3
six knots: a speed equivalent to six miles per hour when sailing
4
helm: steering wheel
“It’s him!” one of the young men yelled up at the bridge of the ship. “It’s that kid they
were searching for up off Ventura.” He looked back down at David. “ey had your picture
in the paper and everything. Man, you are one heck of a distance from where they looked.
ey finally gave you up for dead, you know that?”
16
Page 21Session 1
GO ON
Read this sentence from paragraph 7.
Dawn showed a mean gray sea heading up into leaden gray clouds and a
wind that moaned through the stays and rigging.
What tone does this sentence create in the excerpt?
A a tone of threat and danger
B a tone of distrust and sadness
C a tone of curiosity and confusion
D a tone of reflection and longing
In paragraph 9, what is the effect of the phrase “slamming, rising, heeling, skidding, slamming
down again”?
A It imitates the disorder of David’s thoughts during the storm.
B It shows the persistent force of the storm on David and the Frog.
C It emphasizes the repetitive nature of the waters along the Baja coast.
D It illustrates the conditions in which the Frog was intended to sail.
Which detail best shows David’s attitude toward his situation?
A “e storm might be days getting to him, might not come at all, and he didn’t have much
food and fishing wasn’t going that well.” (paragraph 2)
B “. . . he brought her around, up into the wind until she was tacking northwest and
making a solid six knots.” (paragraph 4)
C “More than once he was knocked off his feet by a wall of water . . . but he never let go of
the helm, rose and took it again and again . . .” (paragraph 8)
D “It was then that he saw the ship—a small, older ship, coming out of the dusk, aiming
almost at him but slightly off his bow, running with the wind and sea.” (paragraph 11)
22
23
24
Page 22GO ON
Session 1
Which detail from the excerpt best supports the idea that David is an experienced sailor?
A “He thought of turning and going back into the bay to ride it out but decided against it.”
(paragraph 2)
B “. . . he worked the helm, let her ease up . . . kept the speed between five and six knots, did
not run from the storm but into it, used it, rolled with it, absorbed it.” (paragraph 7)
C “. . . at one point he snarled, growled at the wind and sea—the helm in his gut, his arms
aching, his legs on fire . . .” (paragraph 9)
D “He came about and let the Frog sail closer, came up into the wind and stopped about
thirty yards away, rising and settling on the waves and swells.” (paragraph 14)
How does paragraph 16 contribute to a theme of the excerpt?
A by revealing that David’s family and friends are people who tend to think negatively
B by including the name of David’s hometown to show where his trip began
C by emphasizing that David has persevered and survived despite the dangerous storm
D by including details about the location of the young man as he spoke to David
25
26
Page 23Session 1
GO ON
is question is worth 2 credits.
In “Excerpt from e Voyage of the Frog,” what effect does the setting have on David? Use two
details from the excerpt to support your response.
Th s s i is r h re i s
Write your response for this question in your separate Session 1 Answer Booklet.
Writing on this page will not be scored.
is question is worth 2 credits.
In “Excerpt from e Voyage of the Frog,” why does David continue on his journey despite the
danger? Use two details from the excerpt to support your response.
Th s i 2 i
Write your response for this question in your separate Session 1 Answer Booklet.
Writing on this page will not be scored.
27
28
Page 24Session 1
STOP
Grade 8
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
Spring 2024
Name: __________________________________________________GRADE 8 ELA SESSION 2English Language Arts Test
Session 2
Grade 8
Spring 2024
New York State
Testing Program
GRADE 8 ELA SESSION 2
RELEASED QUESTIONS
“Counting Giraffes” by David Brown, Highlights for Children, May 2017. Copyright © 2017 by Highlights for Children, Inc. Used with
permission of Highlights for Children, Inc. via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from “Lydia Darragh’s Secret Mission” by Rosalie Lauerman, Highlights, 2017. Copyright © 2017 by Highlights for Children, Inc.
Used with permission of Highlights for Children, Inc. via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from The Gold Hunters: A Story of Life and Adventure in The Hudson Bay Wilds by James Oliver Curwood. Originally published in
1909.
“Only Gold” from Allegories of Life by Mrs. J. S. Adams. Originally published in 1872.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by NWEA, a division of HMH, 14720 Energy Way,
Apple Valley, MN 55124. Copyright © 2024 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 2
Session 2
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some ideas to help you do your best:
• Read the whole passage before you answer the questions. Most questions will only
make sense after you read the whole passage.
• You might need to read the passage more than once to answer a question.
• Read each question carefully. Take your time.
• A question may include a quote from a passage. You might need to review both the
quote and the whole passage to answer the question.
When you write your answers
• make sure to answer the whole question;
• use examples or details from the text;
• write in complete sentences; and
• use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and punctuation.
For the last question in this test book, you may plan your writing on the Planning Page
provided. However, do NOT write your final answer on the Planning Page. Write your final
answer on the lined pages.
Page 1Session 2
Counting Giraffes
by David Brown
Four Likely Suspects
When she was studying to become a
scientist, Megan Strauss rode in a small
airplane to study giraffes. She sat on one
side of the plane, and another researcher sat
on the other side. While a pilot flew over
the Serengeti in Tanzania, Africa, the
researchers peered down and counted
giraffes.
1
“Giraffes can be really hard to spot
from the air!” says Dr. Strauss, who has
since become an independent wildlife
ecologist. “I am always amazed how easily
we can spot warthogs and other small
animals, yet we sometimes have trouble
seeing giraffes. Giraffes are slender in
shape, and they may not cast a good
shadow, depending on the angle of the sun.”
2
In their search for giraffes, scientists
spotted trouble. In the 1970s, about 13,000 giraffes lived in Serengeti National Park. Since
then, the number has been going down, and the park now has about 3,500.
3
e research team that studied Serengeti giraffes included Dr. Craig Packer of the
University of Minnesota, Dr. Morris Kilewo of Tanzania National Parks, and Dr. Dennis
Rentsch of Germany’s Frankfurt Zoological Society.
4
e Serengeti is about the size of Vermont, so the scientists could not study the entire
area. Instead, they surveyed three regions where giraffes were studied in the 1970s. As
they expected, they saw far fewer of these animals. In one area, the number of giraffes
dropped from about 550 to about 75.
5
e team wanted to find out why the number of giraffes was now smaller. e
scientists looked at four possible causes: lions, parasites, illegal hunters (called poachers),
and poor food supply. “We found that both poaching and food supply were likely limiting
population growth,” Dr. Strauss says. “[Lack of] food limits birth rates, and poaching is a
significant cause of adult mortality.”
6
Page 2GO ON
Session 2
Read this article. Then answer questions 29 through 35.
Trouble for Giraffes
To find out if lions had been killing more giraffes in recent years, the team looked at
calf survival rates and long-term records of giraffes killed by lions. Lions kill more calves
than adults, but the team found no decrease in calf survival aer the calves are born,
compared with the 1970s. ey also found little change in the number of giraffes killed by
lions over the past four decades. Lions were not the problem.
7
e team then asked whether too many giraffes were being killed by parasites, such
as worms that infect the digestive system. Like lions, parasites kill more calves than adults,
but the numbers also pointed away from parasites. On the ground, the researchers
counted parasite eggs in giraffe droppings, and they found too few to harm the giraffe
population. Parasites were not the cause either.
8
e research team looked at the two other possible causes. ey asked if poachers
were killing too many giraffes. Two of the areas they studied are close to places with a lot
of people and where giraffe meat is sometimes sold in local markets. Poachers catch more
adult males than other giraffes, probably because they set traps in dense woods, where
male giraffes spend a lot of time. As the researchers feared, they spotted too few males
compared with females and calves in those two areas, a sign of poaching.
9
e scientists also wondered if the giraffes had enough food. An environment with
plenty of food can support lots of giraffes, including healthy females who have many
calves. When the food supply is short, the environment supports fewer giraffes and the
females have fewer calves. A lot of new trees have grown in the Serengeti since the 1970s,
but many are a type that giraffes do not like to eat. e researchers found fewer calves
today than in the 1970s compared with the number of adult females, a sign that food was
in short supply.
10
In her research from the airplane and on the ground, Dr. Strauss helped discover why
the Serengeti has so few giraffes. Now she plans to help the struggling animals. “e
Serengeti is one of Earth’s natural wonders,” she says. “And giraffes are an essential part of
it.”
11
Dr. Strauss is working with others on an environmental education program for
Tanzania, including books for students. ese materials will educate Tanzanians and help
them to help giraffes. As knowledge grows and changes are made, they hope the giraffe
population will rebound.
12
Page 3Session 2
GO ON
Which idea would be most important to include in a summary of the article?
A “e Serengeti is about the size of Vermont, so the scientists could not study the entire
area. Instead, they surveyed three regions . . .” (paragraph 5)
B “e scientists looked at four possible causes: lions, parasites, illegal hunters (called
poachers), and poor food supply.” (paragraph 6)
C “To find out if lions had been killing more giraffes in recent years, the team looked at calf
survival rates and long-term records . . .” (paragraph 7)
D “When the food supply is short, the environment supports fewer giraffes and the females
have fewer calves.” (paragraph 10)
Read this quotation from paragraph 11.
“e Serengeti is one of Earth’s natural wonders,” she says.
What is the effect of Dr. Strauss’s word choice in this quotation?
A It indicates that Dr. Strauss considers this area a marvel.
B It suggests that Dr. Strauss wants to study the ecology of the area.
C It shows that Dr. Strauss wants to strengthen the reputation of Tanzania.
D It demonstrates that Dr. Strauss considers the giraffe population level critical to the area.
What is the meaning of “rebound” as used in paragraph 12?
A return to a location
B recover from a challenge
C replace with something new
D reveal a problem
29
30
31
Page 4GO ON
Session 2
Which sentence states a central idea of the article?
A Researchers are determining the reasons for changes in the giraffe population.
B Environmentalists are distributing books to increase understanding of giraffes.
C Adult giraffes are better equipped than calves to handle threats in the wild.
D Giraffes are more challenging to study than other wild animals in Africa.
How does the author emphasize the significance of a food source to the Serengeti giraffe
population?
A by describing the wide variety of foods the giraffes can choose from
B by describing positive changes in the environment where the giraffes live
C by explaining that female giraffes need plenty of food to sustain reproduction
D by explaining that the giraffes have recently adapted to new diets
What benefit does Dr. Strauss’s research team offer to Tanzanians and the future of the giraffes?
A a chance to invent new methods for counting and keeping track of giraffe populations
B a way to analyze nutrition sources for giraffes in challenging environments
C a solution for keeping poachers out of protected giraffe environments
D a new viewpoint on how to support endangered giraffe populations
32
33
34
Page 5Session 2
GO ON
Protecting Earth’s plants and animals is important to keep the environment balanced and healthy.
How do the details in the article support this idea?
A by describing how scientific study influences diversity in the environment
B by suggesting that one change can impact other parts of the environment
C by arguing that the environment must be free of human influences to improve
D by explaining how the environment will continue to naturally maintain animal variety
35
Page 6GO ON
Session 2
Excerpt from Lydia Darragh’s Secret
Mission
by Rosalie Lauerman
A Spy in Action
In the autumn of 1777, during the Revolutionary War, the British army seized
Philadelphia and set up headquarters there.
1
Lydia Darragh and her family lived across from the British headquarters. When
General William Howe, the British commander, needed an additional meeting room, he
took over a large room at the Darragh house. Sometimes Lydia would overhear British
soldiers discussing incoming shipments or troop movements. ey spoke freely around
her because they knew the Darraghs were Quakers, members of a religious group who
remained neutral during the war.
2
But the British were unaware that the Darraghs secretly supported America’s war for
independence. eir oldest son, Charles, was a lieutenant in the American army, and
Lydia was a spy for the American commander in chief, General George Washington.
3
In order to smuggle information to Washington, Lydia would tell her husband what
she overheard. He would write the message in code. Lydia would then fit the note on a
buttonmold, sew fabric over it, and attach it to her son John’s coat. Fourteen-year-old John
would eagerly trek to the American camp about 13 miles away at White Marsh to visit his
brother. Charles would snip off the button, decode the message, and deliver the
information to American headquarters.
4
On December 2, 1777, a British officer arrived at Lydia’s house. He ordered her to
prepare the large room for a top-secret meeting that evening and demanded that everyone
be in bed before the meeting started.
5
When the officers arrived, Lydia let them in and went to bed. Her family was already
asleep. But Lydia couldn’t sleep. Muffled sounds from the room pulled Lydia from her
bed.
6
She tiptoed toward the meeting room just in time to hear someone reading a final
order. “e troops should march out . . . late in the evening of the 4th, attack Washington’s
army and . . . victory was certain.”
7
Lydia slipped back into bed. Worried, she wondered how she would alert the troops
of the planned attack only two days away.
8
Page 7Session 2
GO ON
Read this article. Then answer questions 36 through 42.
A Secret Mission
When an officer knocked on her bedroom door to say the meeting had ended, Lydia
didn’t answer. He returned shortly and again she didn’t answer. On the third knock, Lydia
rose and pretended to be half asleep. She stumbled into the hall, shuffled toward the door,
and locked it aer the officers.
9
Lydia was too troubled to sleep. She had never uncovered information this
important. She knew she must act quickly to save the American soldiers, including
Charles.
10
e next day, she plotted a secret mission to warn General Washington. It would be
an act of high treason, punishable by death if she was caught. So Lydia decided to act
alone without telling her family. She would not risk their lives.
11
Before dawn on December 4, Lydia arose, wrapped her gray wool cape around her,
and headed out. As she neared Washington’s camp, she spotted an American officer on
horseback approaching her. She recognized him as a friend, Captain Charles Craig.
12
e captain asked what she was doing so far from home. In a so, hushed voice,
Lydia told him about the British plan. Captain Craig thanked her and raced to
headquarters.
13
When the British arrived at White Marsh, General Howe found the American troops
armed with cannons. Clearly, someone had warned them. In a cold fury, Howe ordered his
troops to return to Philadelphia.
14
Lydia spent the next few days fearing for Charles’s safety. She didn’t know what had
happened at White Marsh, and she certainly couldn’t ask.
15
Once again, a British officer banged at her door. He marched in, stone-faced, ordered
her into the meeting room—and locked the door.
16
Lydia trembled, fearing that her secret had been discovered. She knew that spies were
hanged. She felt faint and almost fell to the floor. e officer told her to sit down.
17
Sternly, he asked if any of the others in her family were awake on the night of the
officer’s last meeting. Lydia replied truthfully that they were all in bed and asleep. “I need
not ask you for we had great difficulty in waking you to fasten the door aer us.”
18
Rising from his chair so forcefully that it toppled over, he boomed, “One thing is
certain; the enemy had notice of our coming, were prepared for us, and we marched back
like a parcel of . . . fools.”
19
He stormed out, without even considering that Lydia might have delivered the
warning.
20
A wave of relief rushed over Lydia. She thanked God that Charles was safe and the
British hadn’t suspected her.
21
Page 8GO ON
Session 2
How do the details in paragraphs 1 through 3 help develop a central idea in the article?
A ey explain the events that strengthened the American army.
B ey establish the situation that made it easier to assist the war effort.
C ey explain the importance of religion to some people during the war.
D ey establish the reason the British located their headquarters in Philadelphia.
As used in paragraph 6, what does the phrase “sounds from the room pulled Lydia from her bed”
suggest about Lydia?
A She senses the men must be discussing something very important.
B She hopes the officers will stop meeting at her home in Philadelphia.
C She worries that one of the buttonmold messages has been discovered.
D She wonders if the officers are beginning to question her neutrality as a Quaker.
What important idea does the author develop in paragraphs 5 through 7?
A Lydia’s dedication to her family
B Lydia’s willingness to risk her safety
C Lydia’s tendency to do what she is asked
D Lydia’s attitude about sharing her home
36
37
38
Page 9Session 2
GO ON
What is a motivation for Lydia’s actions in paragraphs 12 and 13?
A She wants to visit her son at White Marsh.
B She believes Captain Craig knows her son.
C She receives a message from her son.
D She worries for her son’s life.
What is the effect of the phrase “In a so, hushed voice” as used in paragraph 13?
A e reader realizes that Lydia’s trip has taken a toll on her physically.
B e reader is reminded of the dangers at every point in a mission such as this.
C e reader is informed about how women were expected to address leaders in the army.
D e reader understands that Lydia has doubts as to whether she should have made
the trip.
Which quotation most directly causes the events in paragraph 16?
A “When the officers arrived, Lydia let them in and went to bed.” (paragraph 6)
B “She recognized him as a friend, Captain Charles Craig.” (paragraph 12)
C “When the British arrived at White Marsh, General Howe found the American troops
armed with cannons.” (paragraph 14)
D “Sternly, he asked if any of the others in her family were awake on the night of the
officer’s last meeting.” (paragraph 18)
39
40
41
Page 10GO ON
Session 2
How does the event in paragraph 20 relate to the details in paragraph 2?
A It shows that the British continue to hold a mistaken belief about the Darraghs.
B It presents evidence that the British will lose against the American troops.
C It suggests that the British believe they can learn something from Lydia Darragh.
D It provides support for the idea that the British still plan to attack White Marsh.
42
Page 11Session 2
GO ON
A young Native American named Wabigoon, or Wabi, has just shown Roderick, or Rod,
and Mukoki a lump of gold he has found.
Excerpt from e Gold Hunters: A
Story of Life and Adventure in the
Hudson Bay Wilds
by James Oliver Curwood
Only those who have lived in this quest and who have pursued that elusive ignis
fatuus1 of all nations—the lure of gold—can realize the sensations which stir the blood and
heat the brain of the treasure seeker as he dips his pan into the sands of the stream where
he believes nature has hidden her wealth. As Roderick Drew, a child of that civilization
where the dollar is law as well as might, returned to the exciting work which promised
him a fortune he seemed to be in a half dream. About him, everywhere, was gold! For no
moment did he doubt it; not for an instant did he fear that there might be no more gold in
the sand and gravel from which Wabigoon’s nugget had come. Treasure was in the very
sandbar under his feet! It was out there among the rocks, where the water beat itself
angrily into sputtering froth; it was under the fall, and down in the chasm, everywhere,
everywhere about him. In one month John Ball and his companions had gathered twenty-
seven pounds of it, a fortune of nearly seven thousand dollars! And they had gathered it
here! Eagerly he scooped up a fresh pan of the precious earth. He heard the swish-swish of
the water in Wabigoon’s and Mukoki’s pans. But beyond this there were no sounds made
by them.
1
In these first minutes of treasure seeking no words were spoken. Who would give the
first shout of discovery? Five minutes, ten, fieen of them passed, and Rod found no gold.
As he emptied his pan he saw Wabi scooping up fresh dirt. He, too, had failed. Mukoki
had waded out waist deep among the rocks. A second and a third pan, and a little chill of
disappointment cooled Rod’s blood. Perhaps he had chosen an unlucky spot, where the
gold had not settled! He moved his position, and noticed that Wabigoon had done the
same. A fourth and a fih pan and the result was the same. Mukoki had waded across the
stream, which was shallow below the fall, and was working on the opposite side. A sixth
pan, and Rod approached the young Indian. e excitement was gone out of their faces.
An hour and a half—and no more gold!
2
Page 12GO ON
Session 2
Read this story. Then answer questions 43 and 44.
____________________
1
elusive ignis fatuus: something chased aer that leads nowhere
Mukoki came across to join them. Out among the rocks he had found a fleck of gold
no larger than the head of a pin, and this new sign gave them all fresh enthusiasm. Taking
off their boots both Rod and Wabi joined the old pathfinder in midstream. But each
succeeding pan added to the depressing conviction that was slowly replacing their hopes.
e shadows in the chasm began growing longer and deeper. Far overhead the dense
canopies of red pine shut out the last sun-glow of day, and the gathering gloom between
the mountains gave warning that in this mysterious world of the ancient cabin the dusk of
night was not far away. But not until they could no longer see the gleaming mica in their
pans did the three cease work. Wet to the waist, tired, and with sadly-shattered dreams
they returned to their camp. For a short time Rod’s hopes were at their lowest ebb. Was it
possible that there was no more gold, that the three adventurers of long ago had
discovered a “pocket” here, and worked it out? e thought had been growing in his head.
Now it worried him.
3
Page 13Session 2
GO ON
is question is worth 2 credits.
What is a theme developed in paragraph 3 of “Excerpt from e Gold Hunters: A Story of Life and
Adventure in the Hudson Bay Wilds” ? Use two details from the story to support your response.
43
Page 14GO ON
Session 2
is question is worth 2 credits.
A legend is a story or rumor from an earlier time that many people believe, but it has not been
proven to be true. What element of “Excerpt from e Gold Hunters: A Story of Life and Adventure
in the Hudson Bay Wilds” is similar to a legend? Use two details from the story to support your
response.
44
Page 15Session 2
GO ON
One day children go out to a field where they are delighted to find some small, golden
stones. All return at night except one son.
“Only Gold” from Allegories of Life
by Mrs. J. S. Adams
____________________
1
paramount to the wishes of kindred: more important than the wishes of family
e next day at noon his parents sent a messenger to him, bidding him return. But
the love of his golden stones was paramount to the wishes of kindred,1 and the
unnumbered comforts of a happy home; and his reply to the messenger was, “I will return,
when I have enough of these,” pointing to a large collection which was already higher than
his head. At nightfall hunger seized him. He felt too weary to go in search of food, but the
demand of nature asserted its claim, and he dragged himself to a field nearby, where grew
berries and fruits in abundance. His spirits rose aer the cravings of hunger were satisfied,
and he lay down again by his precious pile of stones.
1
e days glided into weeks, and still he fed upon the berries and gathered the golden
pebbles. His father had ceased to send messengers to him, knowing that nothing but a
long experience would teach his child the value of life’s many blessings, and that gold
alone has no power to bless us. e father suffered much in knowing and realizing that his
son must learn the truths of life through such severe lessons; but wisdom told him it could
not be otherwise.
2
e household mourned much for their absent brother. ey missed him in their
daily joys, and every hour they watched, waited, and hoped to see him return. ey almost
rejoiced when the bleak winds of autumn swept the foliage from the trees, because they
could look farther down the road for their brother.
3
“I shall soon be able to travel and see the world,” said the youth to himself every day
as the pile of gold grew higher; but, alas for human calculation! He awoke one morning to
find his huge mountain of gold one solid mass. e action of the light, heat, and
atmosphere had fused them together, and no exertion of his could break off even the
smallest atom.
4
Must he return with not even one golden pebble? For he had gathered them all—not
one was in sight, no more were to be found.
5
His golden dream of travel was over, and, worse, the freshness and buoyancy of youth
had departed. His limbs, alas! were stiff and sore. He had a mountain of gold, not one
atom of which he could use for himself or others. And now he must return to his father’s
house empty-handed, and void of truths or incidents to relate to his brothers.
6
Page 16GO ON
Session 2
Read this story. Then answer questions 45 and 46.
is question is worth 2 credits.
What lesson does the author present for the reader in the story “Only Gold”? Use two details from
the story to support your response.
45
Page 17Session 2
GO ON
AnswerPlanning Page
You may PLAN your writing for question 46 here if you wish, but do NOT write
your final answer on this page. Writing on this Planning Page will NOT count
toward your final score. Write your final answer on Pages 19 and 20.
Page 18GO ON Session 2
is question is worth 4 credits.
In “Excerpt from e Gold Hunters: A Story of Life and Adventure in the Hudson Bay Wilds” and
“Only Gold,” how do the characters’ attitudes toward gold contribute to the tone of each story?
What is similar about the tone of the stories? What is different about the tone of the stories? Use
details from both stories to support your response.
In your response, be sure to
explain how the characters’ attitudes toward gold in “Excerpt from e Gold Hunters: A
Story of Life and Adventure in the Hudson Bay Wilds” and “Only Gold” contribute to the
tone of each story
describe what is similar about the tone of the stories
describe what is different about the tone of the stories
use details from both stories to support your response
46
Page 19Session 2
GO ON
Page 20Session 2
S
T
O
P
Grade 8
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
Spring 2024
Multiple Choice
Questions
Percentage of Students
Who Answered Correctly
(P-Value)
Average
Points Earned
P-Value
(Average Points Earned ÷
Total Possible Points)
15 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.4 Reading 0.72
16 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.3 Reading 0.55
17 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Reading 0.65
18 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.6 Reading 0.61
19 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.3 Reading 0.58
20 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.6 Reading 0.61
21 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Reading 0.80
22 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.4 Reading 0.76
23 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.4 Reading 0.55
24 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.6 Reading 0.65
25 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.8 Reading 0.78
26 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Reading 0.72
27 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.3 Writing to Sources 1.53 0.76
28 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.8 Writing to Sources 1.49 0.75
29 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Reading 0.57
30 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.4 Reading 0.49
31 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.L.4 Reading 0.80
32 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Reading 0.84
33 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.3 Reading 0.68
34 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.3 Reading 0.55
35 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.9 Reading 0.62
36 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Reading 0.49
37 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.4 Reading 0.81
38 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Reading 0.73
39 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.3 Reading 0.70
40 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.4 Reading 0.72
41 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.3 Reading 0.68
42 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.3 Reading 0.70
43 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Writing to Sources 1.42 0.71
44 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.9 Writing to Sources 1.35 0.67
45 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.2 Writing to Sources 1.52 0.76
46 Constructed Response 4 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-8.R.6 Writing to Sources 1.91 0.48
*This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question on the 2024 operational ELA test. However,
each constructed-response question measures proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards.
For example, two-point and four-point constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the analyses described in the mapped standard and
then produce written responses that are rated based on writing standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please
refer to the rubrics shown in the Educator Guides.
Constructed Response Questions
Session 1
Session 2
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2024 English Language Arts Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 8
Question Type Key Points Standard Subscore