New York State administered the English Language Arts
Tests in April 2024 and is making approximately 75% of the
questions from these tests available for review and use.New York State Testing Program
Grade 7
English Language Arts Test
Released Questions
2024
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT / THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
New York State Testing Program Grades
4–8 English Language Arts
Released Questions from 2024 Exams
Background
As in past years, SED is releasing large portions of the 2024 NYS Grades 3–8 English Language Arts and Mathematics
test materials for review, discussion, and use.
For 2024, included in these released materials are at least 75 percent of the test questions that appeared on the
2024 tests (including all constructed-response questions) that counted toward students’ scores. Additionally, SED is
providing information about the released passages; the associated text complexity for each passage; and a map that
details what learning standards each released question measures and the correct response to each question. These
released materials will help students, families, educators, and the public better understand the tests and the New
York State Education Department’s expectations for students.
Understanding ELA Questions
Multiple-Choice Questions
Multiple-choice questions are designed to assess the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards in
English Language Arts. These questions ask students to analyze different aspects of a given text, including central
idea, style elements, character and plot development, and vocabulary. Almost all questions, including vocabulary
questions, will be answered correctly only if the student comprehends and makes use of the whole passage.
For multiple-choice questions, students select the correct response from four answer choices. Multiple-choice
questions assess reading standards in a variety of ways. Some ask students to analyze aspects of text or vocabulary.
Many questions require students to combine skills. For example, questions may ask students to identify a segment of
text that best supports the central idea. To answer these questions correctly, a student must first comprehend the
central idea and then show understanding of how that idea is supported. Questions tend to require more than rote
recall or identification.
Two-Credit Constructed-Response Questions
Two-credit constructed-response questions are designed to assess New York State P–12 Reading and Language
Standards. These are single questions in which a student uses textual evidence to support his or her answer to an
inferential question. These questions ask the student to make an inference (a claim, position, or conclusion) based on
their analysis of the passage, and then provide two pieces of text-based evidence to support their answer.
The purpose of the two-credit constructed-response questions is to assess a student’s ability to comprehend and
analyze text. In responding to these questions, students are expected to write in complete sentences. Responses
require no more than three complete sentences. The rubric used for evaluating two-credit constructed-response
questions can be found in the grade-level Educator Guides at https://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/
grades-3-8-ela-math-and-science-test-manuals.
Four-Credit Constructed-Response Questions
Four-credit constructed-response questions are designed to measure a student’s ability to write from sources.
Questions that measure Writing from Sources prompt students to communicate a clear and coherent analysis of one
or two texts. The comprehension and analysis required by each four-credit response is directly related to grade-
specific reading standards. Student responses are evaluated on the degree to which they meet grade-level writing and
language expectations. This evaluation is made by using a rubric that incorporates the demands of grade-specific
New York State P–12 Reading and Language Standards.
The integrated nature of the standards for ELA and literacy requires that students are evaluated across the strands
(Reading, Writing, and Language) with longer pieces of writing, such as those prompted by the four-credit
constructed-response questions. The rubric used for evaluating four-credit constructed-response questions can be
found in the grade-level Educator Guides at https://www.nysed.gov/state-assessment/grades-3-8-ela-math-and-
science-test-manuals.
New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards Alignment
The alignment to the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards for English Language Arts is intended
to identify the analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question. However, some questions measure
proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards. For
example, two-credit and four-credit constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the analyses
described in the mapped standard and then produce written responses that are rated based on writing
standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please refer to
the rubrics.
These Released Questions Do Not Comprise a “Mini Test”
To ensure it is possible to develop future tests, some content must remain secure. This document is not intended
to be representative of the entire test, to show how operational tests look, or to provide information about how
teachers should administer the test; rather, its purpose is to provide an overview of how the test reflects the
demands of the New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards.
The released questions do not represent the full spectrum of the standards assessed on the State tests, nor do they
represent the full spectrum of how the standards should be taught and assessed in the classroom. It should not be
assumed that a particular standard will be measured by an identical question in future assessments.
2024 Grade 7 ELA Test Text Complexity Metrics for
Released Questions Available
Selecting high-quality, grade-appropriate passages requires both objective text
complexity metrics and expert judgment. For the Grades 3–8 assessments based on the
New York State P–12 Next Generation Learning Standards for English Language Arts,
both quantitative and qualitative rubrics are used to determine the complexity of the
texts and their appropriate placement within a grade-level ELA exam.
Quantitative measures of text complexity are used to measure aspects of text
complexity that are difficult for a human reader to evaluate when examining a text.
These aspects include word frequency, word length, sentence length, and text cohesion.
These aspects are efficiently measured by computer programs. While quantitative text
complexity metrics are a helpful start, they are not definitive.
Qualitative measures are a crucial complement to quantitative measures. Using
qualitative measures of text complexity involves making an informed decision about the
difficulty of a text in terms of one or more factors discernible to a human reader
applying trained judgment to the task. To qualitatively determine the complexity of a
text, NYS educators use a rubric composed of five factors; four of these factors are
required and one factor is optional. The required criteria are: meaning, text structure,
language features, and knowledge demands. The optional factor, graphics, is used only
if a graphic appears in the text.
To make the final determination as to whether a text is at grade-level and thus
appropriate to be included on a Grades 3–8 assessment, New York State uses a two-step
review process, which is an industry best-practice. First, all prospective passages
undergo quantitative text complexity analysis using three text complexity measures. If
at least two of the three measures suggest that the passage is grade-appropriate, the
passage then moves to the second step, which is the qualitative review using the text-
complexity rubrics. Only passages that are determined appropriate by at least two of
three quantitative measures of complexity and are determined appropriate by the
qualitative measure of complexity are deemed appropriate for use on the exam.
Text Complexity Metrics for 2024 Grade 7 Passages
Passage Title Word
Count
Lexile
Flesch-Kincaid
ATOS
Qualitative
Review
Excerpt from Bessie Coleman: First Black
Woman Pilot 962 1070 8.9 8.06 Appropriate
Excerpt from Roll of Thunder, Hear
My Cry 932 1130 8.1 7.1 Appropriate
Excerpt from Rule of Rock 747 740 4.8 5.92 Appropriate
Prairie Dogs: Little Rodents That Talk Big 675 1020 7.7 6.83 Appropriate
PAIR - Excerpt from Hiking for Fun 516 1000 7.3 7.21 Appropriate
PAIR - Excerpt from Want a Healthier
Family? Tell Them to Take a Hike 503 1110 7.1 7.9 Appropriate
New York State 2024 Quantitative Text Complexity Chart for Assessment and Curriculum
To determine if a text’s quantitative complexity is at the appropriate grade level, New
York State uses the table below. In cases where a text is excerpted from a large work,
only the complexity of the excerpt that students see on the test is measured, not the
large work, so it is possible that the complexity of a book might be above or below grade
level, but the text used on the assessment is at grade level. Because the measurement
of text complexity is inexact, quantitative measures of complexity are defined by grade
band rather than by individual grade level and then paired with the qualitative review by
an educator.
Grade
Band ATOS
Degrees of
Reading
Power Flesch-Kincaid
The Lexile
Framework
Reading
Maturity SourceRater
2nd –3rd 2.75 – 5.14 42 – 54 1.98 – 5.34 420 – 820 3.53 – 6.13 0.05 – 2.48
4th –5th 4.97 – 7.03 52 – 60 4.51 – 7.73 740 – 1010 5.42 – 7.92 0.84 – 5.75
6th –8th 7.00 – 9.98 57 – 67 6.51 – 10.34 925 – 1185 7.04 – 9.57 4.11 – 10.66
9th –10th 9.67 – 12.01 62 – 72 8.32 – 12.12 1050 – 1335 8.41 – 10.81 9.02 – 13.93
11th –12th 11.20 – 14.10 67 – 74 10.34 – 14.20 1185 – 1385 9.57 – 12.00 12.30 – 14.50
Source: Student Achievement Partners
Name: __________________________________________________GRADE 7 ELA SESSION 1New York State
Testing Program
GRADE 7 ELA SESSION 1English Language Arts Test
Session 1
Grade 7
Spring 2024
RELEASED QUESTIONS
Excerpt from Bessie Coleman: First Black Woman Pilot by Connie Plantz. Copyright © 2005 by Enslow Publishing LLC. Used with
permission of Enslow Publishers via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from ROLL OF THUNDER, HEAR MY CRY by Mildred D. Taylor, text copyright © 1976 by Mildred D. Taylor. Used by
permission of Dial Books for Young Readers, an imprint of Penguin Young Readers Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. All
rights reserved.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by NWEA, a division of HMH, 14720 Energy Way,
Apple Valley, MN 55124. Copyright © 2024 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 1
Session 1
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some ideas to help you do your best:
• Read the whole passage before you answer the questions. Most questions will only make
sense after you read the whole passage.
• You might need to read the passage more than once to answer a question.
• Read each question carefully. Take your time.
• A question may include a quote from a passage. You might need to review both the
quote and the whole passage to answer the question.
When you write your answers
• make sure to answer the whole question;
• use examples or details from the text;
• write in complete sentences; and
• use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and punctuation.
Page 1Session 1
When African-American Bessie Coleman was not admitted to flight schools in the
United States, she did not give up. She went to France, where she began to train as a
pilot in a famous flight school.
Excerpt from Bessie Coleman: First
Black Woman Pilot
by Connie Plantz
In France, Coleman walked nine miles to and from school every day for ten months.
Her first flying lessons were on the ground in a French Nieuport Type 82 plane. is
twenty-seven-foot biplane with a forty-foot wingspan was made of wood, lacquered cloth,
pressed cardboard, wire, steel, and aluminum. It was rather flimsy, and pilots had to
conduct careful inspections for any flaws that could cause parts to break off in the air.
1
As the trainee, Coleman sat in the rear cockpit. She was not always able to see her
instructor, and she could not hear over the roar of the engine. Instead she learned by
watching. is early aircra did not have brakes or a steering wheel. A vertical stick,
attached to the floor by a hinge, controlled the plane’s up and down movements. Two
rudder pedals caused the plane to go le or right. e instructor in the front cockpit had
the same steering system. When the pilot moved his stick, Coleman would observe how
her stick moved. When the pilot used one of his rudder pedals, Coleman could see one of
her pedals move. She learned that a metal tailskid would drag along the ground upon
touching down. e friction between the ground and the skid slowed the plane. . . .
2
e day of her final test for her license, Coleman was shown where she must land the
plane. To pass the test, she had to land within fiy meters (164 feet) of the spot. First,
Coleman flew a five-kilometer (three-mile) closed-circuit course1 twice at an altitude of
fiy meters. She flew a figure eight, then turned off the engine, glided into a landing, and
rolled to a stop at the exact location. She successfully completed the requirements to earn
her pilot’s license.
3
Page 13Session 1
GO ON
Read this article. Then answer questions 15 through 21.
On June 15, 1921, eighteen years aer Orville and Wilbur Wright’s pioneering flight,
Bessie Coleman became the first black woman in the world to earn the prestigious2
Fédération Aéronautique Internationale (FAI) pilot’s license. Because she had been refused
flying lessons in the United States, Coleman now had an international license. is
document proved without a doubt that she was a skilled, well-trained pilot. If she had
been allowed to take flying lessons in the United States, she probably would not have a
license at all, because they were not required until 1926. But Coleman had followed
Robert Abbott’s advice and turned her disadvantages into advantages. Even Amelia
Earhart, who began flying in 1921, did not have this prestigious license until two years
later.
4
Coleman remained in France for a while, she said, because flying was so popular
there. She exaggerated that “flying is as popular in Europe as automobiling is in America.”
In Paris, she visited aircra manufacturers and factories. She later claimed to have ordered
a 130-horsepower Nieuport de Chasse to be manufactured and sent to her in the United
States. . . .
5
ere were no jobs for African-American pilots in the field of aviation.
Barnstorming, though, had no racial restrictions. is aeronautic entertainment was also
open to women. During Coleman’s stay in France, Laura Brownell set a loop-the-loop
record for women pilots—she flew 199 loops. Ten days aer Coleman’s return to Chicago,
Lillian Boyer, a Chicago resident, made her first plane-to-plane transfer. Within the next
year Boyer developed a stunt in which she stood in a speeding automobile and grabbed a
rope ladder attached to the bottom of a plane passing overhead. . . .
6
Bessie Coleman’s dreams went far beyond just becoming a barnstormer. Five months
aer returning to the United States, she told a Chicago Defender reporter that she planned
to start an aviation school. First, she would visit France to purchase planes. Upon her
return, she would perform exhibitions from New York City to the aviation fields at
Mineola, Long Island. en, anyone interested in learning to fly could attend the New
York branch of her aviation school. . . .
7
Bessie Coleman performed the first public flight by an African-American woman in
the United States on September 3, 1922. e show began with a man from the Curtiss
company, Captain Edward C. McVey, escorting Coleman to her plane and then climbing
into the passenger seat. Glenn Curtiss required an employee to fly with Coleman to make
sure she knew how to handle the borrowed Curtiss plane. Coleman was fashionably
dressed in a tailored officer’s uniform made especially for her shows. Her goggles were
pushed up over her leather pilot’s helmet, allowing the crowd to see her face. First she
knelt in the grass beside the plane to pray. en three thousand spectators stood, hats in
hand, as the band played “e Star Spangled Banner.” e last notes of the anthem died
away, and the crowd remained standing as the biplane took off. It spiraled upward into the
sky. en it traced the path of a rising half loop while banking—tilting as it turned.
Several minutes later, Coleman landed and Captain McVey climbed out.
8
Page 14GO ON
Session 1
____________________
1
closed-circuit course: a path that starts and ends in the same place and has been
determined ahead of time
2
prestigious: well-respected, leading
3
flamboyantly: in a show-off manner
4
conservative: careful
e spectators thought the show was over, but Coleman surprised them by picking
up African-American stuntman Hubert Fauntleroy Julian. He flew with her to
fieen hundred feet, then flamboyantly3 parachuted from the wing of the airplane. e
onlookers went wild. ey had just witnessed the first solo flight of an African-American
woman pilot. Aer a smooth landing, Captain McVey presented Coleman with a flower
bouquet. She concluded the show by taking individual passengers up in the plane for a $5
fee.
9
e New York entertainment newspaper Billboard reported that as a pilot, Coleman
was conservative4 but skilled. Officials at the field praised her ability to pilot a plane she
had no prior experience with. Billboard also reported that more African Americans
probably flew that day than had flown since planes were invented.
10
Page 15Session 1
GO ON
Which statement best expresses a central idea of paragraph 2?
A Sticks and rudder pedals were used in both cockpits of the airplane.
B People learned how to fly airplanes by observing the actions of the pilot.
C Metal tailskids would create friction to slow the airplanes as they landed.
D Pilots maneuvered their airplanes by using vertical sticks and rudder pedals.
What do the details in paragraph 7 most reveal about Bessie Coleman?
A her preference for planes made in France
B her desire to share her knowledge with others
C her desire to travel throughout the United States
D her dissatisfaction with performing as a barnstormer
What is the main way paragraph 3 connects with paragraph 8?
A by referring to the altitude to which Coleman flew
B by describing Coleman’s popularity with crowds
C by indicating the types of planes Coleman flew
D by demonstrating Coleman’s skills as a pilot
15
16
17
Page 16GO ON
Session 1
How do paragraphs 8 and 9 develop a central idea in the article?
A by referring to the thousands of people watching the first female African-American
aviator
B by indicating that Coleman was prohibited from flying the plane without another pilot
C by illustrating how the first female African-American pilot flew in loops while tilting the
plane
D by describing how Coleman wanted to fly a type of plane with which she was unfamiliar
e tone of paragraph 9 can best be described as
A anxious, due to the dangerous jump of the stuntman
B tense, because of the height to which the airplane flew
C delighted, due to the reaction of the crowd to the stuntman
D enthusiastic, because people were excited for the opportunity to fly
Which statement best describes why Coleman goes to flight school in France?
A She knows there are more aircra manufacturers in France.
B She is denied the opportunity to train as a pilot in the United States.
C She believes flying is more popular in France than in the United States.
D She knows she will be able to learn by observing her instructors in France.
18
19
20
Page 17Session 1
GO ON
Which sentence would be most important to include in a summary of the article?
A Coleman first takes flying lessons in a twenty-seven-foot biplane.
B Coleman claims flying in France is as popular as driving cars in America.
C Coleman is described by newspapers as a careful but skilled pilot.
D Coleman is the first African-American woman to perform a solo flight.
21
Page 18GO ON
Session 1
Nine-year-old Cassie Logan and her three brothers are on their way to school. It is the
first day of a new school year.
Excerpt from Roll of under, Hear
My Cry
by Mildred D. Taylor
My youngest brother paid no attention to me. Grasping more firmly his newspaper-
wrapped notebook and his tin-can lunch of cornbread and oil sausages, he continued to
concentrate on the dusty road. He lagged several feet behind my other brothers, Stacey
and Christopher-John, and me, attempting to keep the rusty Mississippi dust from
swelling with each step and driing back upon his shiny black shoes and the cuffs of his
corduroy pants by liing each foot high before setting it gently down again. Always
meticulously neat, six-year-old Little Man never allowed dirt or tears or stains to mar
anything he owned. Today was no exception. . . .
1
“Y’all go ahead and get dirty if y’all wanna,” he replied without even looking up from
his studied steps. “Me, I’m gonna stay clean.” . . .
2
“Ah, Cassie, leave him be,” Stacey admonished,1 frowning and kicking testily at
the road.
3
“I ain’t said nothing but—”4
Stacey cut me a wicked look and I grew silent. His disposition had been irritatingly2
sour lately. If I hadn’t known the cause of it, I could have forgotten very easily that he was,
at twelve, bigger than I, and that I had promised Mama to arrive at school looking clean
and ladylike. “Shoot,” I mumbled finally, unable to restrain myself from further comment,
“it ain’t my fault you gotta be in Mama’s class this year.”
5
Stacey’s frown deepened and he jammed his fists into his pockets, but said nothing.6
Christopher-John, walking between Stacey and me, glanced uneasily at both of us but
did not interfere. A short, round boy of seven, he took little interest in troublesome things,
preferring to remain on good terms with everyone. Yet he was always sensitive to others
and now, shiing the handle of his lunch can from his right hand to his right wrist and his
smudged notebook from his le hand to his le armpit, he stuffed his free hands into his
pockets and attempted to make his face as moody as Stacey’s and as cranky as mine. But
aer a few moments he seemed to forget that he was supposed to be grouchy and began
whistling cheerfully. ere was little that could make Christopher-John unhappy for very
long, not even the thought of school.
7
Page 19Session 1
GO ON
Read this story. Then answer questions 22 through 28.
I tugged again at my collar and dragged my feet in the dust, allowing it to si back
onto my socks and shoes like gritty red snow. I hated the dress. And the shoes. ere was
little I could do in a dress, and as for shoes, they imprisoned freedom-loving feet
accustomed to the feel of warm earth.
8
“Cassie, stop that,” Stacey snapped as the dust billowed in swirling clouds around my
feet. I looked up sharply, ready to protest. Christopher-John’s whistling increased to a
raucous,3 nervous shrill, and grudgingly I let the matter drop and trudged along in moody
silence, my brothers growing as pensively4 quiet as I.
9
Before us the narrow, sun-splotched road wound like a lazy red serpent dividing the
high forest bank of quiet, old trees on the le from the cotton field, forested by giant green
and purple stalks, on the right. A barbed-wire fence ran the length of the deep field,
stretching eastward for over a quarter of a mile until it met the sloping green pasture that
signaled the end of our family’s four hundred acres. An ancient oak tree on the slope,
visible even now, was the official dividing mark between Logan land and the beginning of
a dense forest. Beyond the protective fencing of the forest, vast farming fields, worked by a
multitude5 of share-cropping families, covered two thirds of a ten-square-mile plantation.
at was Harlan Granger land.
10
Once our land had been Granger land too, but the Grangers had sold it during
Reconstruction to a Yankee for tax money. In 1887, when the land was up for sell again,
Grandpa had bought two hundred acres of it, and in 1918, aer the first two hundred
acres had been paid off, he had bought another two hundred. It was good rich land, much
of it still virgin forest, and there was no debt on half of it. But there was a mortgage on the
two hundred acres bought in 1918 and there were taxes on the full four hundred, and for
the past three years there had not been enough money from the cotton to pay both and
live on too.
11
at was why Papa had gone to work on the railroad.12
In 1930 the price of cotton dropped. And so, in the spring of 1931, Papa set out
looking for work, going as far north as Memphis and as far south as the Delta country. He
had gone west too, into Louisiana. It was there he found work laying track for the railroad.
He worked the remainder of the year away from us, not returning until the deep winter
when the ground was cold and barren. e following spring aer planting was finished, he
did the same. Now it was 1933, and Papa was again in Louisiana laying track.
13
Page 20GO ON
Session 1
____________________
1
admonished: scolded
2
irritatingly: in a way that bothers
3
raucous: rowdy
4
pensively: thoughtfully
5
multitude: huge number
I asked him once why he had to go away, why the land was so important. He took my
hand and said in his quiet way: “Look out there, Cassie girl. All that belongs to you. You
ain’t never had to live on nobody’s place but your own and long as I live and the family
survives, you’ll never have to. at’s important. You may not understand that now, but one
day you will. en you’ll see.”
14
Page 21Session 1
GO ON
Read this phrase from paragraph 8.
. . . and as for shoes, they imprisoned freedom-loving feet accustomed to
the feel of warm earth.
How does the use of personification in this phrase mainly add to the reader’s understanding of
the narrator?
A by emphasizing the narrator’s preference for being outside
B by illustrating how the narrator feels about school
C by showing how the narrator is different than Little Man
D by highlighting the narrator’s desire to help Papa
Which detail would be most important to include in a summary of the story?
A “Always meticulously neat, six-year-old Little Man never allowed dirt or tears or stains to
mar anything he owned.” (paragraph 1)
B “If I hadn’t known the cause of it, I could have forgotten very easily that he was, at twelve,
bigger than I . . .” (paragraph 5)
C “An ancient oak tree on the slope, visible even now, was the official dividing mark
between Logan land and the beginning of a dense forest.” (paragraph 10)
D “. . . for the past three years there had not been enough money from the cotton to pay
both and live on too.” (paragraph 11)
How does the narrator mainly develop each brother’s viewpoint?
A by indicating their feelings about school
B through descriptions of their personalities
C by indicating her disagreements with them
D through descriptions of their appearances
22
23
24
Page 22GO ON
Session 1
Siblings may be very different but still completely understand each other. How do the details in
the story best support this idea?
A e narrator describes the traits of each brother as they walk to school.
B e narrator and her brothers understand the importance of the land to their family.
C e narrator realizes why her oldest brother is feeling unhappy.
D e narrator and her brothers respect their father’s decision to work in other states.
What do the details in the story reveal about Papa?
A He prefers working on the railroad to growing cotton.
B He was not surprised when the price of cotton changed.
C He is determined to keep the land his father purchased.
D He was not able to talk to his other children about the land.
25
26
Page 23Session 1
GO ON
is question is worth 2 credits.
What is a central idea of “Excerpt from Roll of under, Hear My Cry”? Use two details from the
story to support your response.
This uestion is wor h credits.
H t l n d
Write your response for this question in your separate Session 1 Answer Booklet.
Writing on this page will not be scored.
is question is worth 2 credits.
In paragraphs 5 through 7 of “Excerpt from Roll of under, Hear My Cry,” how does the author’s
word choice affect the tone of the story? Use two details from the story to support your response.
This ue tion i worth re i s
Write your response for this question in your separate Session 1 Answer Booklet.
Writing on this page will not be scored.
27
28
Page 24Session 1
STOP
Grade 7
English Language Arts Test
Session 1
Spring 2024
Name: __________________________________________________GRADE 7 ELA SESSION 2English Language Arts Test
Session 2
Grade 7
Spring 2024
New York State
Testing Program
GRADE 7 ELA SESSION 2
RELEASED QUESTIONS
Excerpt from “Rule of Rock” by Benjamin Jacobson, Cricket, January 1, 2015, Vol. 42 Issue 4. Copyright © 2015 by Cricket Media. Used
with permission of Cricket Media via Copyright Clearance Center.
Adapted from “Prairie Dogs: Little Rodents That Talk Big” by Cynthia Mills, Ask, March 1, 2002. Copyright © 2002 by Cricket Media. Used
with permission of Cricket Media via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from Hiking for Fun! by Jef Wilson, 2006. Published by Compass Point Books. Used with permission of Coughlan Companies LLC
via Copyright Clearance Center.
Excerpt from “Want a Healthier Family? Tell Them to Take a Hike” by Brent Coleman, The Cincinnati Enquirer, May 30, 2013. Used with
permission of the Gannett Company, Inc. via Copyright Clearance Center.
Developed and published under contract with the New York State Education Department by NWEA, a division of HMH, 14720 Energy Way,
Apple Valley, MN 55124. Copyright © 2024 by the New York State Education Department.
Session 2
Session 2
TIPS FOR TAKING THE TEST
Here are some ideas to help you do your best:
• Read the whole passage before you answer the questions. Most questions will only
make sense after you read the whole passage.
• You might need to read the passage more than once to answer a question.
• Read each question carefully. Take your time.
• A question may include a quote from a passage. You might need to review both the
quote and the whole passage to answer the question.
When you write your answers
• make sure to answer the whole question;
• use examples or details from the text;
• write in complete sentences; and
• use correct spelling, grammar, capitalization, and punctuation.
For the last question in this test book, you may plan your writing on the Planning Page
provided. However, do NOT write your final answer on the Planning Page. Write your final
answer on the lined pages.
Page 1Session 2
Excerpt from Rule of Rock
by Benjamin Jacobson
e RPS exam, the ultimate test, was supposed to start ten minutes ago. e top five
candidates in the class—Persephone was first—gathered to face a one-time-only pass/fail
assessment of their worth. Success meant becoming a Decider, a member of the Global
Legislature, the lawmaking branch of Orbis Publican, one of only a thousand people in the
world entrusted with political power. Like the ten thousand other students of the
Academy, she’d received twelve years of strict training and guidance in history and
philosophy and psychology, and she’d participated in countless simulations. All this was
intended to create young adults who could see all sides of an issue and act for the greatest
good. . . .
1
e Proctor spoke. “In this test, there are three possible answers. e first is stone,
the second paper, and the third blades. Stone crushes blades but is suffocated by paper.
Paper suffocates stone but is cut by blades. And blades can cut paper but are crushed by
stone. I will choose one weapon, and you will choose a weapon in response. e students
who select the wisest answer will become Deciders.”
2
Persephone’s mind raced and she felt a flush across her skin. All her years of work
climbing to the top of her class would come down to this, a game of chance? Her mind
calculated the rather simple odds. No answer had an obvious advantage. Could this be the
true secret behind the utopian world government of Orbis Publican? In the end the
peaceful world was all up to chance?
3
Her heartbeat quickened as an idea came to her. Was this a test to see who would
rebel against such an oversimplification of a vital process? Persephone thought about
protesting, but something held her back. She didn’t have enough information. Lee, third in
the class, thought otherwise.
4
“Proctor,” Lee said, stepping forward out of line. “I refuse to participate in this test.
Random chance is an unjust method for choosing Deciders.”
5
“You decide too quickly. Such snap judgments make you unworthy. You are
dismissed.” Lee’s face flushed, and his lips trembled. He ran out of the room as quickly as
Persephone had entered.
6
“Any other complaints?” e candidates stood silent. “Good, let’s continue. I choose
stone.” e Proctor held a fist out in front of him. It was a trick then. e Proctor revealed
his weapon before the students could choose theirs. He had destroyed his own odds of
winning. e Proctor stepped to Christy, the le-most student. “What is your choice?”
7
Page 2GO ON
Session 2
Read this story. Then answer questions 29 through 35.
Christy extended a flat hand signifying paper. e Proctor moved to his right to find
Luke. Luke hesitated, then extended paper as well. Would they both be approved as
Deciders? Persephone knew it couldn’t be that easy. Nothing in her twelve years at the
Academy had been that easy. Laura, to her immediate right, obviously agreed, for on her
turn she extended the two fingers of the blades, the loser’s gambit. Laura must be thinking
that the wisest choice was to accept defeat, to compromise, to settle. Was that the right
answer?
8
e Proctor stood now in front of Persephone. In all of her tests she had never
doubted a single choice. But now in this, her most important assessment, she had to go
with her gut. She extended her hand. . . .
9
Later, each student sat down with the Proctor to discuss the result. Persephone
watched them go into the room one by one. No one came out. Finally, her turn came. She
entered the chamber. e Proctor sat at a red table. Behind him there was an exit.
10
“During the RPS, you chose Stone. Why?” . . .11
“e game is a test. I knew that I could defeat you, but you didn’t ask me to defeat
you. You asked me to choose wisely. It is not wisdom to want to destroy your rival. It is
evil to do so. It is also not correct to bow down to your rival; one must stand up for what
one knows is right. e wise answer is to meet on an even field, stone on stone. e battle
may be protracted, but in the end only equality can create victory for all.”
12
e Proctor leaned back in his chair. “at is a hard lesson to learn: To hold back
from winning and to fight through the loss. To seek a fair balance is to find the Truth.
Welcome to the Legislature, Decider Persephone.”
13
Page 3Session 2
GO ON
Read these sentences from paragraph 6.
“You decide too quickly. Such snap judgments make you unworthy. You
are dismissed.”
Which important idea does the author develop in these sentences?
A It is best to lead by example.
B Make sure to tell the truth when you speak.
C Try to have all of the information before making a choice.
D Go with your first instinct when making a statement.
What does paragraph 8 reveal about Persephone?
A She struggles at her school.
B She becomes frustrated easily.
C She wants to have more choices.
D She thinks carefully before acting.
What is the best definition of “settle” as it is used in paragraph 8?
A to agree to something less
B to separate materials
C to become quiet
D to find a place to stay
29
30
31
Page 4GO ON
Session 2
Which detail would be most important to include in a summary of the story?
A “. . . she’d received twelve years of strict training and guidance in history and philosophy
and psychology . . .” (paragraph 1)
B “e students who select the wisest answer will become Deciders.” (paragraph 2)
C “Lee’s face flushed, and his lips trembled. He ran out of the room . . .” (paragraph 6)
D “e Proctor sat at a red table. Behind him there was an exit.” (paragraph 10)
Which sentence from the story best describes Persephone’s perspective about the RPS exam?
A “Persephone’s mind raced and she felt a flush across her skin.” (paragraph 3)
B “Persephone thought about protesting, but something held her back.” (paragraph 4)
C “Persephone knew it couldn’t be that easy.” (paragraph 8)
D “Persephone watched them go into the room one by one.” (paragraph 10)
What does the word “equality” mean as it is used in paragraph 12?
A agreement
B fairness
C intelligence
D tolerance
32
33
34
Page 5Session 2
GO ON
How does Persephone change from the beginning to the end of the story?
A At first she is afraid of the test, but then she succeeds at it.
B At first she is uncertain about the test, but then she understands it.
C At first she is suspicious of the test, but then she cares about it.
D At first she is angry at the test, but then she finds it amusing.
35
Page 6GO ON
Session 2
Prairie Dogs: Little Rodents at
Talk Big
by Cynthia Mills
Prairie dogs got their name because people thought their calls sounded a little like a
dog’s bark. Actually, maybe they should’ve been called prairie watchdogs because they
bark to alert the colony when intruders enter their territory.
1
From the wagging tail of a happy dog, to the bristling fur and spitting yowls of an
angry cat, animals can definitely get their messages across. Dr. Con Slobodchikoff, a
biologist at Northern Arizona University, thinks that at least one animal—the lowly prairie
dog—can say a lot.
2
Prairie dog alarms are distinctive. e sound is halfway between the buzzing of a
kazoo and the squawk of a disturbed crow, and can be heard from three miles away. It’s
hard for humans to hear the differences between the calls, though, because they only last
about half a second—about as long as it takes to say “Hey!” really fast.
3
So Dr. Slobodchikoff decided to record the calls. He ran the sounds through a
computer that would slow them down and turn them into detailed pictures called
spectrograms. Using spectrograms, he could compare one sound to another and see if
they were different.
4
e spectrograms showed that prairie dogs make different alarm calls for hawks than
for coyotes and other land-bound threats. But while the calls for flying hunters like hawks
were pretty much the same, the calls for animals on the ground—for dogs, cats, or humans
—were different from one another.
5
Were the prairie dogs saying more than “Look out above” and “Look out below”?
Slobodchikoff recorded the calls over and over again. He not only recorded the prairie
dogs’ alarm calls while students or dogs walked by, but also when plywood cutouts of a
coyote, a skunk, and a simple oval were placed nearby.
6
e prairie dogs watched regular dogs the same way they watched coyotes, but not as
intensely. eir reactions to humans depended on past experience. In an area where
humans had long hunted them, the prairie dogs dove into their burrows to hide; in places
where people le them alone, they didn’t react much at all. e prairie dogs responded to
the cutouts in various ways, but not the same way they did to a real predator.
7
Page 7Session 2
GO ON
Read this article. Then answer questions 36 through 42.
e calls were even different when people wore different clothes! ere was a call for
a human in a white T-shirt and another for a human in a yellow T-shirt. en
Slobodchikoff tried different types of dogs, using huskies, retrievers, and even a miniature
poodle. Again the calls changed for the type of dog.
8
At first Slobodchikoff couldn’t believe it. Aer all, prairie dogs are just rodents, like
mice and rats, and aren’t supposed to be that smart. So he worked harder to prove his
findings, testing them again and again. Every time the results were the same.
9
e prairie dogs were telling each other some pretty detailed things: not just “Watch
out!” but “Look, there’s a guy with his dog, but they look harmless.” Although the calls are
a single sound, or at least a continuous one, they seem to carry a lot of information.
10
Slobodchikoff also thinks prairie dogs pay attention to the order of the sounds they
make. Besides studying alarm calls, he has also recorded the little noises, the chitter-
chattering, they make to each other. Since the prairie dogs don’t do anything when they
hear these sounds (for example, they don’t duck or dive into a hole as they do when they
hear an alarm call), he doesn’t know if the sounds have any meaning. But prairie dogs do
seem to make the sounds in particular orders: ey chitter-chatter, but they don’t chatter-
chitter. Does the order of the sounds matter? If so, it might mean that their “language” is
even more complicated than we thought.
11
ough Slobodchikoff may not have proved that prairie dogs actually talk, he has
found out what most of us have suspected all along: Animals have a lot to tell us. We just
have to find out the best ways to listen.
12
Page 8GO ON
Session 2
According to paragraph 3, the calls of prairie dogs are “distinctive” because they
A are understood by other animals
B tend to be short
C convey important information
D are unique sounds
Which claim by the author is most strongly supported with evidence?
A “Prairie dogs got their name because people thought their calls sounded a little like a
dog’s bark.” (paragraph 1)
B “It’s hard for humans to hear the differences between the calls, though, because they only
last about half a second . . .” (paragraph 3)
C “e prairie dogs watched regular dogs the same way they watched coyotes, but not as
intensely.” (paragraph 7)
D “Slobodchikoff also thinks prairie dogs pay attention to the order of the sounds . . .”
(paragraph 11)
36
37
Page 9Session 2
GO ON
Read this sentence from paragraph 9.
At first Slobodchikoff couldn’t believe it.
Which statement provides the best support for this claim?
A Prairie dogs have almost the same response to coyotes as they do to the regular dogs
they encounter.
B Prairie dogs have similar reactions to airborne predators, although they have a variety of
responses to land animals.
C Prairie dogs have unique responses to people wearing different colors as well as to
various types of dogs.
D Prairie dogs have alarm calls they use to warn their colonies, although their calls provoke
little response.
How does paragraph 5 relate to paragraph 10?
A by explaining that prairie dog alarms appear to contain specific details
B by indicating the similarity of prairie dog alarm calls about airborne predators
C by explaining that prairie dogs may make a continuous sound when they communicate
D by indicating that prairie dog calls distinguish between land animals and birds
38
39
Page 10GO ON
Session 2
Which statement best represents a central idea of the article?
A “Actually, maybe they should’ve been called prairie watchdogs because they bark to alert
the colony . . .” (paragraph 1)
B “Aer all, prairie dogs are just rodents, like mice and rats, and aren’t supposed to be that
smart.” (paragraph 9)
C “Although the calls are a single sound, or at least a continuous one, they seem to carry a
lot of information.” (paragraph 10)
D “Besides studying alarm calls, he has also recorded the little noises, the chitter-
chattering . . .” (paragraph 11)
Read this phrase from paragraph 11.
ey chitter-chatter, but they don’t chatter-chitter.
What does this phrase suggest about prairie dogs?
A e noises prairie dogs make to each other consist of predictable patterns.
B Prairie dogs are unable to reverse the order of the sounds they make to each other.
C e noises prairie dogs make to each other are less important than their alarm calls.
D Prairie dogs usually ignore the sounds that are unrelated to the presence of predators.
e main reason spectrograms are important to Slobodchikoff ’s research is because they
A suggest to researchers that prairie dogs respond to different clothes
B help researchers analyze prairie dog alarm calls from several miles away
C enable researchers to hear slowed-down prairie dog alarm calls
D allow researchers to compare many prairie dog alarm calls
40
41
42
Page 11Session 2
GO ON
Jef Wilson is the author of two books about the benefits of physical activity.
Excerpt from Hiking for Fun!
by Jef Wilson
Getting Back to Nature
Exploring New Territory
A Hike for Everyone!
Hiking, which is exploring the outdoors on foot, is one of the best ways to get
connected to nature. It’s basically walking or climbing on nature routes or trails.
Sometimes there is a special destination, but oen the reward of hiking is the walk itself
and everything you see along the way—trees, plants, animals, and bodies of water. For
many people, it’s a great way to “get away from it all.”
1
Once you’ve mastered the basics of hiking, you might even want to move on to
orienteering,1 a competition in which hikers navigate their way across an area of land.
Orienteering will really put your hiking skills to the challenge!
2
Today, we can easily find out about a place on the other side of the world through
encyclopedias, the Internet, and maps. But before there were maps of the whole world,
people only knew about the areas close to them. Hiking explorers were the first to find out
about other lands.
3
An ancient Egyptian explorer named Hannu (also known as Hennu) made the first
recorded expedition, or trip, around 2750 B.C. Hannu wrote about his explorations in
stone. He explored areas that are now part of eastern Ethiopia and Somalia. When he
returned to Egypt, he brought back great treasures including metal, wood, and precious
myrrh, which is dried tree sap used in perfumes.
4
Many hikers, trailblazers, and other explorers have charted the world since Hannu.
eir efforts have helped people learn all the things we know about the world today.
5
e Lewis and Clark expedition, from 1804 to 1806, was the first trip to the Pacific
Coast and back. In the early 1800s, most of the country was uncharted, and people knew
very little about it. Lewis and Clark made maps of major rivers and mountain ranges.
6
Hiking allows all kinds of people to enjoy nature. Boys and girls, men and women,
young folks and seniors—hiking is for everyone. When you hike, you set your own pace
and control where and how you go.
7
Page 12GO ON
Session 2
Read this article. Then answer question 43.
Exercise Your Rights
____________________
1
orienteering: a competitive sport that involves racing to checkpoints using a map
and compass
Why hike? Hiking allows you to go to places that oen cannot be seen any other way.
Most hiking trails do not allow cars and bikes, so the only way to enjoy them is by your
own two feet. Most hikers also find peace in nature. It can help you relax and relieve stress.
8
Because of its wide appeal, hiking is a great way to spend time with your family and
friends. ere are different types of hiking. Off-trail hiking is called “bushwalking” or
“bushwhacking.” Overnight or longer hikes are called “backpacking.” Hiking even has
other names in different parts of the world. New Zealanders use the word “tramping” for
overnight trips. Hiking in the mountains of Nepal and India is called “trekking.”
9
Besides being fun, hiking is great exercise! Regular hiking builds strong muscles, a
strong heart, and healthy lungs. It builds stamina and endurance, which means you’ll have
more energy for longer periods of time!
10
Page 13Session 2
GO ON
is question is worth 2 credits.
In “Excerpt from Hiking for Fun!” how is a central claim supported in paragraphs 1 and 2? Use
two details from the article to support your response.
43
Page 14GO ON
Session 2
Brent Coleman is a staff writer for the Cincinnati Enquirer.
Excerpt from Want a Healthier
Family? Tell em to Take a Hike
by Brent Coleman
Fighting Digital Distractions
One of Tammy York’s treasured moments with her two children occurred when they
were on a hike at Cincinnati Nature Center during the last cicada1 invasion.
1
ey spotted a newly hatched cicada hanging low to the ground, got down to its level
and watched it dry out its new wings—for an entire hour.
2
“It was better than any movie they’d seen,” York says. “ey were so enthralled.”3
York, who holds a wildlife management degree from Purdue University, worked as a
naturalist for 21 years before staying home to be a mom and write a book about hiking in
and around Cincinnati.
4
She says she believes there are long-term mental health benefits to hiking with
children.
5
York, author of 60 Hikes Within 60 Miles shares that perspective with Cincinnati
father of two Jeff Alt, who just published his second book, Get Your Kids Hiking.
6
e two hiking advocates know they’re fighting upstream against digital technology
for their kids’ attention. But they say they’ve seen firsthand the payoff of walking in the
woods.
7
“It opens the avenue for kids to teach themselves, to concentrate on one thing,” York
says, a skill she believes is diminished by spending too much time listening to music on an
iPod or playing video games.
8
“ere are so many distractions. Everything is calling for their attention,” she says.
“Twenty years from now, that one thing (ability to concentrate) is going to be severely
lacking in our society.”
9
Hiking, York says, gives a boy or girl’s body the chance to reset itself and his or her
mind to focus. . . .
10
Page 15Session 2
GO ON
Read this article. Then answer questions 44 through 46.
Little Ones Don’t Know ey’re Learning
____________________
1
cicada: winged insect that hatches in predictable, long-term cycles
2
second-guess: judge something later, oen in a critical or negative way
York gave her children tiny “princess” backpacks to hike with. She empowered them
by letting them choose their snacks (apple or banana, Wheat ins or pretzels) and
Crayon colors. She packed drawing paper, water in Nalgene bottles and plastic bags for
sitting down where it was wet.
11
When kids are little, she says, watch for fatigue on their faces as they hike. Stop and
sit down. Let them draw what they want and talk about what they want.
12
“If you go out and preach, preach, preach, they’ll tune you out,” York says.13
Alt believes parents’ teaching is absorbed by infants, but there’s a certain point to stop
doing it.
14
When they say “Look, Daddy, a bird” it’s time to switch to “child directed hiking” in
which you allow them to touch, smell and engage with nature on their own, Alt says.
15
To help them, he says, “Take along a magnifying glass and let them look at leaves up
close. Bring a bug holder. Tip rocks over to let them see all the pill bugs underneath.
16
“e goal,” Alt says, “is to expose kids to the outdoors and make it a routine so they
won’t second-guess2 it when they get older.”
17
By that he means, second-guess Dad when he says “Kill that iPod, son. It’s time for a
hike.”
18
Page 16GO ON
Session 2
is question is worth 2 credits.
In “Excerpt from Want a Healthier Family?,” what effect does the repetition of the word
“concentrate” in paragraphs 8 and 9 have on the information in the section “Fighting Digital
Distractions”? Use two details from the article to support your response.
44
Page 17Session 2
GO ON
is question is worth 2 credits.
Based on the article “Excerpt from Want a Healthier Family?,” what does the author want the
reader to know about how hiking affects children? Use two details from the article to support
your response.
45
Page 18GO ON
Session 2
AnswerPlanning Page
You may PLAN your writing for question 46 here if you wish, but do NOT write
your final answer on this page. Writing on this Planning Page will NOT count
toward your final score. Write your final answer on Pages 21 and 22.
Page 20GO ON Session 2
is question is worth 4 credits.
e authors of “Excerpt from Hiking for Fun!” and “Excerpt from Want a Healthier Family?” both
discuss the topic of hiking. What similarities are found in each author’s discussion of hiking? How
is this topic developed differently in each article? Use details from both articles to support your
response.
In your response, be sure to
identify the similarities found in each author’s discussion of hiking
describe how this topic is developed differently in each article
use details from both articles to support your response
46
Page 21Session 2
GO ON
Page 22Session 2
S
T
O
P
Grade 7
English Language Arts Test
Session 2
Spring 2024
Multiple Choice
Questions
Percentage of Students
Who Answered Correctly
(P-Value)
Average
Points Earned
P-Value
(Average Points Earned ÷
Total Possible Points)
15 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.2 Reading 0.63
16 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.3 Reading 0.68
17 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.3 Reading 0.77
18 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.5 Reading 0.59
19 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.4 Reading 0.49
20 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.3 Reading 0.46
21 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.2 Reading 0.79
22 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.4 Reading 0.59
23 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.2 Reading 0.46
24 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.6 Reading 0.54
25 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.9 Reading 0.32
26 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.3 Reading 0.69
27 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.2 Writing to Sources 1.35 0.67
28 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.4 Writing to Sources 1.36 0.68
29 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.2 Reading 0.83
30 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.3 Reading 0.73
31 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.L.4 Reading 0.73
32 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.2 Reading 0.64
33 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.6 Reading 0.60
34 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.4 Reading 0.73
35 Multiple Choice B 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.3 Reading 0.56
36 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.4 Reading 0.59
37 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.8 Reading 0.30
38 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.8 Reading 0.53
39 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.5 Reading 0.59
40 Multiple Choice C 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.2 Reading 0.67
41 Multiple Choice A 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.4 Reading 0.52
42 Multiple Choice D 1 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.3 Reading 0.50
43 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.8 Writing to Sources 1.63 0.82
44 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.4 Writing to Sources 1.50 0.75
45 Constructed Response 2 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.6 Writing to Sources 1.54 0.77
46 Constructed Response 4 NGLS.ELA.Content.NY-7.R.3 Writing to Sources 2.24 0.56
*This item map is intended to identify the primary analytic skills necessary to successfully answer each question on the 2024 operational ELA test. However,
each constructed-response question measures proficiencies described in multiple standards, including writing and additional reading and language standards.
For example, two-point and four-point constructed-response questions require students to first conduct the analyses described in the mapped standard and
then produce written responses that are rated based on writing standards. To gain greater insight into the measurement focus for constructed-response questions, please
refer to the rubrics shown in the Educator Guides.
Subscore
Constructed Response Questions
Session 1
Session 2
THE STATE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK / ALBANY, NY 12234
2024 English Language Arts Tests Map to the Standards
Grade 7
Question Type Key Points Standard