Released Items
Published February 2020
Copyright 2020 by the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction. All rights reserved.ã
Public Schools of North Carolina
Department of Public Instruction | State Board of Education
Division of Accountability Services/North Carolina Testing Program
North Carolina
End-of-Grade
Assessment
Grade 8
Reading
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
1
Sample Questions
Hiddenite
Hiddenite is a pale green gemstone that was first discovered in North Carolina in 1879.
The community in which hiddenite was found, called White Plains at the time, is near
Stony Point in Alexander County. White Plains has since been formed into a town named
Hiddenite. The gemstone takes its name from William Earl Hidden, a mineralogist hired
by Thomas Edison to search the area for platinum. He did not find platinum, but he did
send a piece of the unknown mineral to a skilled chemist. The chemist eventually
identified the gemstone as a type of crystal and named the new discovery after the man
who sent him the sample.
S1 What was the original name of the community in which hiddenite was found?
A White Plains
B Stony Point
C North Carolina
D Alexander County
S2 What does sample mean in the sentence below from the text?
“The chemist eventually identified the gemstone as a type of crystal and named
the new discovery after the man who sent him the sample.”
A the whole item
B a small part
C the complete unit
D a heavy thingRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
2 Go to the next page.
Canada’s Boy Wonder
by Lianne George
1 What is Pearson’s most significant achievement?
A He served as president of the UN’s General Assembly.
B He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1957.
C He defined what it means to be Canadian.
D He was Canada’s 14th prime minister.
2 What does paragraph 1 emphasize about Lester B. Pearson?
A that he is not fully understood for the impact he had on the country
B that he is well known for all of his achievements for the country
C that he served the country in many different roles
D that he utilized unique people to serve the countryRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
3 Go to the next page.
3 What claim is made about the relationship between Canada and the
United Kingdom before Lester B. Pearson served as Prime Minister in the
statement below from paragraph 2?
“he helped transform Canada from a colonial appendage to an autonomous state
with a powerful voice”
A Canada relied on the United Kingdom.
B The United Kingdom relied on Canada.
C Canada was more self-sufficient than the United Kingdom.
D Canada and the United Kingdom did not communicate.
4 What does the usage of the word autonomous in the sentence below from
paragraph 2 emphasize about Canada?
“In short, he helped transform Canada from a colonial appendage to an
autonomous state with a powerful voice and a sterling reputation.”
A its dependence
B its gratitude
C its infamy
D its independence
5 How does paragraph 3 support the central idea?
A It stresses Pearson’s strength as a foreign policymaker.
B It highlights Pearson’s weaknesses in appearance and speech.
C It compares Pearson to other prime ministers.
D It quotes Pearson to emphasize the truth.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
4 Go to the next page.
6 How does the author reveal the shortcomings that contribute to Pearson’s
accomplishments being overlooked today?
A by quoting Pearson in the book Lester B. Pearson
B by mentioning Pearson’s sense of humor and personality
C by comparing Pearson to well-remembered, popular government leaders
D by blaming it on the primitive technology in the 1960s
7 Which statement contradicts the idea that Lester B. Pearson was an important
figure in Canadian history?
A “Perhaps more than any Canadian leader in history, Pearson embodies a
certain archetypal notion of what it means to be Canadian.”
B “For better or worse, he popularized the idea of us as an understated,
compassionate, peacemaking people—labels we’re still negotiating
four decades later.”
C “Every time a teenager sets off to Europe with a Canadian flag sewn onto his
backpack, it’s because of him.”
D “And every time a local is suddenly pleasant to the kid because of that flag,
he has Lester B. Pearson to thank.”
8 Which quote shows how Pearson contributed to the way foreign countries regard
Canada?
A “All of this after having already forged an ambitious career as a diplomat.”
B “He spoke with a slight lisp. He wore horn-rimmed glasses, bow ties, and
homburg hats.”
C “The media, Cohen says, couldn’t see that amid all the chaos and tumult and
smoke and fire, Lester B. Pearson was quietly legislating.”
D “And every time a local is suddenly pleasant to the kid because of that flag,
he has Lester B. Pearson to thank.”RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
5 Go to the next page.
Dish Night
by Michael Martone
9 Which detail from the selection supports the theme?
A “Every Wednesday was Dish Night at Wells Theater.”
B “We heard about Pearl Harbor at a Sunday matinee.”
C “This would be the movie of my life, this walking home under the moon from
a movie with a girl holding a dinner plate under her arm like a book.”
D “I came home and washed the dishes every night, and she stacked them
away, bowls nesting in bowls as if we were moving the next day.”
10 What does the collection of dishes at the Wells Theatre symbolize?
A the beginning of a valuable collection
B the beginning of a life together
C the beginning of a disaster
D the beginning of an economic downfall
11 What is meant by “Business would pick up then” in paragraph 2?
A The people would come to the theater only during certain times.
B The theater would need to be moved to a new location.
C The movie theater would begin to get a lot of customers.
D The narrator and his girlfriend would come by all the time.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
6 Go to the next page.
12 How does the imagery in paragraph 3 impact the selection?
A It shows the contrast of the Dish Night china, symbolizing innocence, with
the broken china, symbolizing depression.
B It shows china is very fragile and easily broken in the destruction caused by
war.
C It shows the contrast of the girlfriend’s china, symbolizing peace, with the
broken china, symbolizing war.
D It shows china became a symbol of home for the narrator, because he
wanted to return to his girlfriend.
13 What effect does the author create by using the description of the china in
paragraph 3?
A It creates a sense of longing.
B It creates an atmosphere of hopelessness.
C It establishes an air of suspense.
D It establishes a feeling of loathing.
14 How does the narrator’s encounter with the broken china during the war affect
him?
A The narrator’s experience with the broken dishes helps his memory.
B The narrator’s remembrances about the Wells Theatre become less
meaningful.
C The narrator’s feelings about Dish Night begin to seem foolish.
D The narrator’s determination to return home gets stronger.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
7 Go to the next page.
15 Which statement summarizes the selection?
A A young man in love walks his girlfriend home from the movies every
Wednesday night after collecting a dish.
B A young couple’s connection to one another is developed through the
practice of dish collecting.
C After Pearl Harbor, a young man goes to Europe to fight in the war.
D After the war, a young couple shop for more dishes to add to their collection.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
8 Go to the next page.
Adapted from “The Apple Tree”
by Edgar A. Guest
When an apple tree is ready for the world to come and eat,
There isn’t any structure in the land that’s “got it beat.”
There’s nothing man has built with the beauty or the charm
That can touch the simple grandeur of the monarch of the farm.
5 There’s never any picture from a human being’s brush
That has ever caught the redness of a single apple’s blush.
When an apple tree’s in blossom it is glorious to see,
But that’s just a hint, at springtime, of the better things to be;
That is just a fleeting glimpse, a vision quickly gone
10 Of the wonders and the splendors that are waiting just beyond
The distant edge of summer; just a forecast of the treat
When the apple tree is ready for the world to come and eat.
Architects of splendid vision long have labored on the earth,
And have raised their dreams in marble and we’ve marveled at their worth;
15 Long the spires of costly buildings have looked upward at the sky;
Rich in promise and in the beauty, they have cheered the passer-by.
But I’m sure there’s nothing finer for the eye of man to meet
Than an apple tree that’s ready for the world to come and eat.
There’s the promise of the apples, red and gleaming in the sun,
20 Like the medals worn by mortals as rewards for labors done;
And the big arms stretched wide open, with a welcome warm and true
In a way that sets you thinking it’s intended just for you.
There is nothing with a beauty so entrancing, so complete,
As an apple tree that’s ready for the world to come and eat.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
9 Go to the next page.
16 Which lines support the theme of the poem?
A “When an apple tree’s in blossom it is glorious to see, / But that’s just a hint,
at springtime, of the better things to be;”
B “Architects of splendid vision long have labored on the earth, / And have
raised their dreams in marble and we’ve marveled at their worth;”
C “But I’m sure there’s nothing finer for the eye of man to meet / Than an
apple tree that’s ready for the world to come and eat.”
D “There’s the promise of the apples, red and gleaming in the sun, / Like the
medals worn by mortals as rewards for labors done;”
17 Which line supports the analysis that the speaker adores apple trees?
A “There isn’t any structure in the land that’s ‘got it beat.’ ”
B “But that’s just a hint, at springtime, of the better things to be;”
C “The distant edge of summer; just a forecast of the treat”
D “And have raised their dreams in marble and we’ve marveled at their
worth;”
18 What does forecast mean in line 11?
A delay
B estimate
C desire
D curiosityRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
10 Go to the next page.
19 How do lines 13–18 support the theme of beauty in the poem?
A by declaring that tall, exquisite buildings and gorgeous apples are costly
B by describing how architects use marble in their designs
C by comparing amazing architectural designs with an apple tree’s
attractiveness
D by praising architects who design attractive buildings
20 What can be inferred from lines 19–24?
A The speaker wins awards for beautiful apples.
B The speaker lacks interest in viewing or eating apples.
C Apple trees grow in various shapes and sizes.
D Apple trees produce beautiful apples for people to enjoy.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
11 Go to the next page.
Adapted from Our Mr. Wrenn: “Mr. Wrenn is Lonely”
by Sinclair Lewis
The ticket taker of the movie theater is a public personage, who stands out on
Fourteenth Street, New York, wearing a gorgeous light blue coat of numerous brass
buttons. He nods to all the patrons, and his nod is the most cordial in town. Mr. Wrenn
used to trot down to Fourteenth Street, passing other shows, just to get that cordial
nod, because he had a lonely furnished room for evenings, and for daytime a tedious job
that always made his head stuffy.
He stands out in the correspondence of the Souvenir and Art Novelty Company as
“Our Mr. Wrenn,” who would be writing you directly and explaining everything most
satisfactorily. At thirty-four, Mr. Wrenn was the sales entry clerk of the Souvenir
Company. He was always bending over bills and columns of figures at a desk behind the
stockroom. He was a meek little bachelor—a person of inconspicuous1 blue ready-made
suits, and a small unsuccessful mustache.
Today—historians have established the date as April 9, 1910—there had been some
confusing mixed orders from the Wisconsin retailers, and Mr. Wrenn had been “called
down” by the office manager, Mr. Mortimer R. Guilfogle. He needed the friendly nod of
the theater ticket taker. He found Fourteenth Street, after office hours, swept by a dusty
wind. Under the elevated station he secretly made believe that he was in Paris, for here
Italian boys swayed with trays of violets; a tramp displayed crimson mechanical rabbits,
which squeaked, on silvery leading-strings; and a newsstand was heaped with the
orange and green and gold of magazine covers.
“Gee!” inarticulated Mr. Wrenn. “Lots of colors. Hope I see foreign stuff like that in the
moving pictures.”
He came primly up to the theater, feeling in his vest pockets for a nickel and peering
around the booth at the friendly ticket taker. But the latter was thinking about buying
Johnny’s pants. Should he get them at the Fourteenth Street Store, or Siegel-Cooper’s,
or over at Aronson’s, near home? So ruminating, he twiddled his wheel mechanically,
and Mr. Wrenn’s pasteboard slip was indifferently received in the plate-glass gullet of
the grinder 2 without the taker’s even seeing the clerk’s bow and smile.
1inconspicuous: not noticeable
2grinder: a machine that takes ticketsRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
12 Go to the next page.
Mr. Wrenn trembled into the door of the theater. He wanted to turn back and rebuke this
fellow, but was restrained by shyness. He had liked the man’s “Fine evenin’, sir”—rain or
shine—but he wouldn’t stand for being cut. Wasn’t he making nineteen dollars a week,
as against the ticket taker’s ten or twelve? He shook his head with the defiance of a
cornered mouse, fussed with his mustache, and regarded the moving pictures gloomily.
They helped him. After a Selig 3 domestic drama came a stirring Vitagraph 4 Western
scene, “The Goat of the Rancho,” which depicted with much humor and tumult the revolt
of a ranch cook. Mr. Wrenn was really seeing, not cowpunchers and sagebrush, but
himself, defying the office manager’s meanness and revolting against the ticketman’s
rudeness. Now he was ready for the nearly overpowering delight of travel-pictures. He
bounced slightly as a Gaumont film presented the island of Java.
He was a connoisseur of travel-pictures, for all his life he had been planning a great
journey. Though he had done Staten Island and taken an excursion to Bound Brook,
neither of these was his grand tour. It was yet to be taken. In Mr. Wrenn, apparently
fastened to New York like a domestic-minded barnacle, lay the possibilities of heroic
roaming. He knew it. He, too, like the man who had taken the Gaumont pictures, would
saunter among Javanese natives in “markets with tiles on the roofs and temples and—
and—uh, well—places!” The scent of Asian spices was in his broadened nostrils as he
scampered out of the theater, without a look at the ticket taker, and headed for
“home”—for his third-floor-front on West Sixteenth Street.
He wanted to prowl through his collection of steamship brochures for a description of
Java. But, of course, when one’s landlady has both the sciatica 5 and a case of Patient
Suffering one stops in the basement dining room to inquire how she is.
3Selig: a company that established the first permanent movie studio in Los Angeles
4Vitagraph: prolific film production company in the early 1900s
5sciatica: pain that can extend from the hip down the back of the thigh, moving along
the sciatic nerveRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
13 Go to the next page.
21 How do Mr. Wrenn’s actions contribute to the development of the theme?
A Mr. Wrenn’s dislike of travel makes him nervous about meeting new people.
B Mr. Wrenn’s love of travel and adventure helps him to imagine a more
exciting life.
C Mr. Wrenn’s dislike of the ticket taker causes him to miss the opportunity for
a great experience.
D Mr. Wrenn’s love of socializing is more important than travel.
22 What can be inferred from paragraph 5?
A The ticket taker is preoccupied; therefore, he neglects to present his normal
smile.
B The ticket taker is angry with Mr. Wrenn; therefore, he refuses to present
his normal smile.
C Mr. Wrenn is angry with the ticket taker; therefore, he refuses to
acknowledge his smile.
D Mr. Wrenn is preoccupied; therefore, he fails to notice the ticket taker.
23 What do Mr. Wrenn’s thoughts in paragraph 6 reveal about his view of the ticket
taker?
A Mr. Wrenn views himself as inferior to the ticket taker.
B Mr. Wrenn views himself as superior to the ticket taker.
C Mr. Wrenn views the ticket taker as an enemy.
D Mr. Wrenn views the ticket taker as a close friend.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
14 Go to the next page.
24 Which quote reveals Mr. Wrenn’s timid nature?
A “At thirty-four, Mr. Wrenn was the sales entry clerk of the
Souvenir Company.”
B “He was always bending over bills and columns of figures at a desk behind
the stockroom.”
C “He shook his head with the defiance of a cornered mouse, fussed with his
mustache, and regarded the moving pictures gloomily.”
D “Mr. Wrenn was really seeing, not cowpunchers and sagebrush, but himself,
defying the office manager’s meanness and revolting against the ticketman’s
rudeness.”
25 How does the perspective of Mr. Wrenn at the movie theater create irony in the
selection?
A Mr. Wrenn believes the ticket taker is rude, but the ticket taker is unaware
that he has hurt Mr. Wrenn’s feelings.
B Mr. Wrenn believes the ticket taker is rude, and the ticket taker knowingly
hurts Mr. Wrenn’s feelings.
C Mr. Wrenn imagines that he is traveling on an adventure with the ticket
taker.
D Mr. Wrenn imagines that he is traveling while paying for his ticket at the
movie theater.
26 What does the author mean by “connoisseur of travel-pictures” in paragraph 8?
A a person who is enthusiastic about movies filmed in other areas
B a person who lacks interest in movies about other places
C a person who is enthusiastic about traveling to see movies
D a person who lacks interest in traveling to see moviesRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
15 Go to the next page.
27 How do the different perspectives of the ticket taker and Mr. Wrenn affect the
story?
A The ticket taker’s friendliness to the unfriendly Mr. Wrenn creates a tone of
confusion.
B The ticket taker’s indifference to Mr. Wrenn’s need for attention creates a
tone of isolation.
C The ticket taker’s enjoyment of movies and Mr. Wrenn’s indifference to them
creates a tone of disappointment.
D The ticket taker’s commitment to his job compared to Mr. Wrenn’s laziness
creates a tone of unfairness and resentment.
28 Which statement provides an objective summary of the selection?
A A lonely man has a ticket taker as his one true friend. He has dreams of
visiting faraway places with this friend.
B A lonely man feels unappreciated at his job. He seeks an opportunity to
advance his career by relocating to a different area.
C A lonely man rents an apartment from a lady he views as a good friend.
Although he likes where he lives, he longs for a better job.
D A lonely man relies too much on a false sense of friendship. He wishes for a
more fulfilling life to help him forget about his troubles.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
16 Go to the next page.
Adapted from “Bats”
by W. S. Dallas
Among the sounds which greet the ear of the wayfarer1 as the shades of evening deepen
into night, one of the commonest is a rather faint chirping noise which comes
mysteriously from overhead. On looking up in search of the source of this peculiar
sound, we may see a small, dark, shadow-like creature sweeping to and fro with great
rapidity. It is one of the curious groups of animals called bats, representatives of which
are to be met with in all countries, always active at night or in the twilight, and
presenting a remarkable general similarity of structure, although in some respects they
may differ considerably in habits. In the British Islands some fourteen species have been
distinguished.
Like the owls, with which they share the dominion2 of the evening air, the bats have
a perfectly noiseless flight; their activity is chiefly during the twilight, although some
species are later, and in fact seem to keep up throughout the whole night. As they
rest during the day, concealed usually in the most inaccessible places they can find,
and are seen only upon the wing, their power of flight is their most striking peculiarity
in the popular mind, and it is perhaps no great wonder that by many people, both in
ancient and modern times they have been regarded as birds. Nevertheless, their hairy
bodies and leathery wings are so unlike anything that we ordinarily understand as
pertaining to a bird, that opinion was apparently always divided, as to the true nature
of these creatures—“a mouse with wings,” as Goldsmith called it once, according to
James Boswell, is certainly a curious animal, and very difficult to classify so long as the
would-be systematist has no particularly definite ideas to guide him. The likeness of the
bat to a winged mouse has made itself felt in the name given to the creature in many
languages, such as the “Chauvesouris” of the French and the “Flitter-mouse” of some
parts of England, the latter being reproduced almost literally in German, Dutch, and
Swedish, while the Danes called the bat a “Flogenmues,” which has about the same
meaning, and the Swedes have a second name, “Lädermus,” evidently referring to the
texture of the wings, as well as to the mouse-like character of the body.
1wayfarer: one who travels on foot
2dominion: territory over an areaRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
17 Go to the next page.
But so soon as we have definite characteristics to appeal to in classification, we find no
difficulty in assigning these puzzling creatures to their proper place in the system. Bats
produce their young alive, and nurse them; the milk being produced by special glands.
Now, these are characteristics which are peculiar among all animals to the vertebrate
class Mammalia. They possess also other characters that are unmistakably mammalian.
Leaving out of consideration the structure of the internal organs, they have teeth
implanted in sockets in the jaws, four limbs, and a hairy covering to the skin, so that
they possess more decidedly mammalian characteristics than some other members of
the class, such as the marine whales and dolphins (Cetacea) and manatees (Sirenia),
which are still often spoken of as fishes. In point of fact, although organized for flight,
the bat may, without any violence to language, be spoken of as a quadruped,3 for its
forelimbs contain all the parts found in those of other mammals fully developed, and
they come into use when the creature is walking on the ground.
Perhaps the special characteristics of the bats will be brought out most distinctly by a
comparison of their structure with that of a bird, seeing that the modification of the
forelimbs into wings is their most striking distinction from other Mammalia; for, although
some other members of the class are spoken of as “flying,” such as the Flying Squirrels,
Flying Lemurs, and Flying Phalangers, these creatures do not really fly, but merely glide
through the air to considerable distances by the action of a broad fold of skin which runs
down each side of the body, and which, when stretched between the extended limbs,
buoys the creatures up in the air after the fashion of a parachute.
3quadruped: an animal, especially a mammal, having four feetRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
18 Go to the next page.
29 What does the word inaccessible mean in the sentence below from paragraph 2?
“As they rest during the day, concealed usually in the most inaccessible places
they can find, and are seen only upon the wing, their power of flight is their most
striking peculiarity in the popular mind, and it is perhaps no great wonder that by
many people, both in ancient and modern times they have been regarded as
birds.”
A not possible to escape
B present at night
C difficult to reach
D not visible on the surface
30 Which quote provides evidence to support the claim that the classification of bats
is complex?
A “Among the sounds which greet the ear of the wayfarer as the shades of
evening deepen into night, one of the commonest is a rather faint chirping
noise which comes mysteriously from overhead.”
B “On looking up in search of the source of this peculiar sound, we may see a
small, dark, shadow-like creature sweeping to and fro with great rapidity.”
C “It is one of the curious groups of animals called bats, representatives of
which are to be met with in all countries, always active at night or in the
twilight, and presenting a remarkable general similarity of structure,
although in some respects they may differ considerably in habits.”
D “Nevertheless, their hairy bodies and leathery wings are so unlike anything
that we ordinarily understand as pertaining to a bird, that opinion was
apparently always divided, as to the true nature of these creatures—‘a
mouse with wings.’ ”RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
19 Go to the next page.
31 What does the word systematist mean in the sentence below from paragraph 2?
“Nevertheless, their hairy bodies and leathery wings are so unlike anything that
we ordinarily understand as pertaining to a bird, that opinion was apparently
always divided, as to the true nature of these creatures—‘a mouse with wings,’ as
Goldsmith called it once, according to James Boswell, is certainly a curious animal,
and very difficult to classify so long as the would-be systematist has no
particularly definite ideas to guide him.”
A one who creates an order of categories
B one who is considered an expert
C one who interprets the meaning of words
D one who studies animals
32 How does the last sentence in paragraph 2 refine a key concept about bats?
A by describing how owls and bats fly at night
B by explaining the functions of a bat’s wings and its furry body
C by showing how a bat is different from both a mouse and a bird
D by illustrating how other languages have similar meanings for the word “bat”
33 How does paragraph 3 contribute to the development of the idea of scientific
classification of bats?
A It explains why classifying any sort of animal is important to its
preservation.
B It describes the specific characteristics that are used to classify bats as
mammals.
C It describes the specific characteristics that are used to understand that bats
are alive.
D It explains why classifying an animal as a mammal is better than classifying
it as a bird.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
20 Go to the next page.
34 How does the author distinguish bats from whales and dolphins in paragraph 3?
A by conveying how difficult it is to classify bats, whales, and dolphins
B by conveying how whales, dolphins, and manatees are considered fish
C by showing how bats, whales, and dolphins nurse their babies with milk
D by showing how the bat has more mammalian traits than whales and
dolphins
35 Which statement reflects the author’s point of view about the bat’s abilities?
A The author is puzzled as to why the bat is unable to be considered a bird.
B The author is dismayed by the bat’s comparison to a mouse.
C The author is fascinated that the bat can both walk and fly.
D The author is disturbed about the bat’s ability to fly noiselessly.
36 Which statement provides an objective summary of the text?
A Bats have been difficult animals to classify throughout history. A deeper
understanding of the animals has led to their categorization as mammals
that can fly like birds.
B Bats have been studied extensively so that we can better understand their
similarity to humans. This study is leading to treatments and cures for
various diseases.
C Bats are beautiful animals that are important to the global ecosystem.
Efforts are being made to bring them back from the brink of extinction.
D Bats are dangerous, bloodthirsty predators that spread rabies. Homes should
be safeguarded against their inhabitation.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
21 Go to the next page.
Hot! Springs
by Kelly Margaret Smith
37 Which quote supports the central idea that Hot Springs is a natural phenomenon?
A “Americans believed the water springing to the surface in
Hot Springs, Arkansas, was a death-defying elixir for the body and soul.”
B “More than water enticed visitors in the early days; Mark claims some slick
advertising played a role as well.”
C “ ‘One of the nineteenth-century writers who reported The Valley of Peace
idea also reported volcanic activity here, which we know is not scientifically
true.’ ”
D “The warm splash of rain from 2400 BCE—traveling miles to get here—is
hope enough.”
38 How does paragraph 3 refine a key concept in the text?
A It provides an explanation of how the water is heated by outlining the
difference between a geyser and the hot springs.
B It suggests that the varying temperatures can be a health hazard by
showing that the springs are very hot.
C It shows that the area was once home to volcanic activity by outlining the
difference between a geyser and the hot springs.
D It provides an explanation on how water constantly pours from the
sandstone of the hot springs.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
22 Go to the next page.
39 Which quote from the text is irrelevant to people’s fascination with Hot Springs?
A “For decades, Americans believed the water springing to the surface in
Hot Springs, Arkansas, was a death-defying elixir for the body and soul.”
B “Unlike the famed geysers of the West, these waters originate as rain and
heat up largely through compression rather than volcanic activity.”
C “As the liquid seeps deeper into the earth, it picks up trace minerals that
many believe give it therapeutic power.”
D “Legends were spread that the various American Indian tribes laid down
their weapons here to share the healing waters in harmony.”
40 What is the meaning of originate in the sentence below from paragraph 3?
“Park ranger Mark Blaeuer says that, unlike the famed geysers of the West, these
waters originate as rain and heat up largely through compression rather than
volcanic activity.”
A start
B remain
C appear
D change
41 Which detail from the text supports the analysis that the water from the springs is
good for the mind and the body?
A “Today people still bustle with excitement about getting into hot water.”
B “As the liquid seeps deeper into the earth, it picks up trace minerals that
many believe give it therapeutic power.”
C “In the late 1800s, Americans trotted around the globe to resort spas for
health and beauty remedies.”
D “Perhaps Hot Springs can’t deliver on the promise of peace and eternal
youth.”RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
23 Go to the next page.
42 Which quote supports the connection between water and the passage of time at
Hot Springs?
A “At an average 143 degrees, water constantly pours forth from the
sandstone at the foot of Hot Springs Mountain.”
B “According to geologists, after the rain falls, it slowly descends 6,000 to
8,000 feet, traveling only about one foot a year.”
C “As the liquid seeps deeper into the earth, it picks up trace minerals that
many believe give it therapeutic power.”
D “Legends were spread that the various American Indian tribes laid down
their weapons here to share the healing waters in harmony.”
43 How does the phrase “therapeutic power” in paragraph 5 affect the meaning of the
text?
A It suggests that the springs were used for health and beauty remedies.
B It suggests that the springs were great for tourists.
C It suggests that the springs pick up traces of minerals.
D It suggests that the rain continues dropping another 6,000 to 8,000 feet
after falling.
44 How does the author connect the American Indian tribes and the Spanish
conquistadores in paragraph 8?
A by explaining America’s need to find peace in the 1870s
B by conveying how the hot springs brought peace throughout history
C by illustrating how advertisers used legends to attract visitors
D by showing how some advertising methods worked better than othersRELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
24
This is the end of the Reading test.
Directions:
1. Look back over your answers for the test questions.
2. Make sure all your answers are entered on the answer sheet. Only what is
entered on the answer sheet will be scored.
3. Put all of your papers inside your test book and close your test book.
4. Stay quietly in your seat until your teacher tells you that testing is
finished.
5. Remember, teachers are not allowed to discuss questions from the test
with you, and you are not allowed to discuss with others any of the test
questions or information in the test.RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
25
Grade 8 Reading
RELEASED Items
2020
Answer Key
Item Number Type Key DOK* Standard
S1 MC A 1
S2 MC B 2
1 MC C 1 RI.8.1
2 MC A 2 RI.8.5
3 MC A 3 RI.8.6
4 MC D 2 RI.8.4
5 MC B 2 RI.8.2
6 MC C 3 RI.8.6
7 MC B 3 RI.8.8
8 MC D 2 RI.8.1
9 MC C 2 RL.8.2
10 MC B 2 RL.8.1
11 MC C 2 L.8.5.a
12 MC D 2 L.8.5.a
13 MC A 2 RL.8.4
14 MC D 2 RL.8.3
15 MC B 2 RL.8.2
16 MC C 2 RL.8.2
17 MC A 2 RL.8.1
18 MC B 2 L.8.4
19 MC C 2 RL.8.2
20 MC D 2 RL.8.1RELEASED
G R A D E 8 R E A D I N G — R E L E A S E D I T E M S
26
Item Number Type Key DOK Standard
21 MC B 2 RL.8.2
22 MC A 2 RL.8.1
23 MC B 2 RL.8.3
24 MC C 2 RL.8.3
25 MC A 3 RL.8.6
26 MC A 2 RL.8.4
27 MC B 3 RL.8.6
28 MC D 2 RL.8.2
29 MC C 2 L.8.4
30 MC D 3 RI.8.8
31 MC A 2 L.8.4
32 MC D 3 RI.8.5
33 MC B 3 RI.8.5
34 MC D 2 RI.8.3
35 MC C 3 RI.8.6
36 MC A 2 RI.8.2
37 MC D 2 RI.8.2
38 MC A 3 RI.8.5
39 MC B 3 RI.8.8
40 MC A 2 L.8.4
41 MC B 2 RI.8.1
42 MC B 2 RI.8.3
43 MC A 2 RI.8.4
44 MC C 2 RI.8.3
*
DOK:
1 = Recall
2 = Skill/Concept
3 = Strategic ThinkingRELEASED
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The North Carolina Department of Public Instruction wishes to express gratitude to the following
authors and publishers, whose permission to reprint copyrighted selections has made these tests
possible. Every effort has been made to locate the copyright owners of material reprinted in this
test booklet. Omissions brought to our attention will be corrected in subsequent editions.
“Canada’s Boy Wonder” by Lianne George from Maclean's September 22, 2008. Copyright ©2008
Rogers Publishing Ltd. Used with permission of Rogers Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
“Dish Night” by Michael Martone. First appeared in Indiana Review, Vol. 10, No. 1 & 2, Copyright
©1987 Michael Martone. Reprinted by permission of the author.
“Hot! Springs” by Kelly Margaret Smith from Southern Living, December, 2003. Copyright ©2003
Meredith Corporation. All rights reserved. Reprinted from Southern Living and published with
permission of Meredith Corporation. Reproduction in any manner in any language in whole or in
part without written permission is prohibited.RELEASED