VIRGINIA STANDARDS OF LEARNING
Spring 2010 Released Test
GRADE 8
READING
Form R0110, CORE 1
Property of the Virginia Department of Education
Copyright ©2010 by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Education, P.O. Box 2120, Richmond, Virginia
23218-2120. All rights reserved. Except as permitted by law, this material may not be reproduced or used in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying or recording, or by any information storage or retrieval
system, without written permission from the copyright owner. Commonwealth of Virginia public school educators may
reproduce any portion of these released tests for non-commercial educational purposes without requesting permission.
All others should direct their written requests to the Virginia Department of Education, Division of Student Assessment
and School Improvement, at the above address or by e-mail to Student_Assessment@doe.virginia.gov.

3
Reading
SAMPLE A
Mia’s Art
1 Mia rushed home and threw open the front door. Her mother whirled around, surprised
that Mia was home from school so early. “I won first place in the art contest!” she said
with pride.
2 Though Mia had been working eagerly on her art submission for weeks, her mother wasn’t
sure what the project involved. “That’s wonderful, Mia! What was the subject of your art
project?” her mother asked.
3 Grinning from ear to ear, Mia handed over her artwork. It was a portrait of her mother.
This story is mostly about Mia —
A working on a project at home
B choosing a new art project
C winning an art contest
D completing a painting
Directions
Read the passage. Then read each question about the passage and choose the best answer.
4
Directions
You do not need to read a passage to answer the following question. Read and answer
the question.
SAMPLE B
Read these sentences.
What does the word misplaced mean?
F lost
G changed
H broken
J hidden
Michael was almost ready to leave
when he realized that he had
misplaced his keys. After searching
for ten minutes, he found the keys
in his backpack.
5
Go to the next
page and continue
working.
6
Directions: Read the story and answer the questions that follow.
A Woman of Courage and Conviction
1 With a satisfied smile, Keisha finished writing the last sentence of her English essay. She
had written about one of her heroes, Rosa Parks, an important figure in the Civil Rights
Movement. Keisha felt inspired by Rosa Parks’ actions, and in her essay she had tried to
depict the courage and conviction Rosa Parks had shown the world.
2 “Keisha,” her mother shouted from downstairs. “It’s almost 4:15. Have you finished your
homework?”
3 “I finished a minute ago, Mom,” Keisha answered. “Don’t worry, I won’t be late getting to
the assisted living center. I just have to put some things in my backpack.” Keisha pulled
down a collection of Maya Angelou’s poetry as well as a book of funny anecdotes from her
bookshelf. She liked to be prepared with a selection of literature to read to the center’s
residents. On an impulse, she added her English notebook as well.
4 Keisha ran down the stairs, poked her head into the kitchen, and said, “I’ll be back by
5:45, Mom. See you later.” Keisha grabbed her jacket and ran out the door. She had to jog
the three blocks to the center to make it by 4:30, when her hour of volunteering began.
5 As Keisha came running in the door, Mrs. Ellis, the assisted living center manager, told
Keisha, “We have a new resident this week. She’s still adjusting to her new surroundings,
and I think you’ll be able to make friends with her.”
6 “What’s her name?” Keisha asked, nervously wondering what this new woman was like.
7 “Her name is Ruby Watson, and she’s lived in Alabama all her life until now,” Mrs. Ellis
explained. “Her only daughter lives here in the city and wants her mother to be near.
You’ll find Mrs. Watson in Room 28. And by the way, Keisha, good luck.”
8 Keisha walked down the hallway to Room 28 at a quick, determined pace. She knocked on
the door and heard a strong voice ask what she wanted. As Keisha walked into the room,
she met the gaze of two piercing brown eyes staring at her suspiciously.
9 “I’m Keisha Jackson, a student volunteer,” Keisha explained as she walked over to
Mrs. Watson and sat down in the chair beside her. “I come here every Thursday afternoon
to help pass the time with residents, or read to them, or, or . . .” Keisha started to stumble
over her words as Mrs. Watson continued to stare at her with an almost belligerent gaze.
10 “I didn’t request anyone to keep me company,” Mrs. Watson interrupted. “I’m alone most
of the time, and that’s how I prefer it.”
11 “But it must be nice to see your daughter,” Keisha said, hoping to give the conversation a
more positive turn.
7
12 “My daughter has to work two jobs, so she seldom comes here to visit me,” Mrs. Watson
said. “And my two grandchildren are so involved with their school activities that they
hardly have time to come to see me.”
13 Keisha decided that a change of subject would be beneficial. “I brought along some books
to read,” she said, pulling the books out of her backpack. “I have Maya Angelou’s poetry
and a book of funny stories.”
14 “I don’t like poetry, and I’m not in the mood for funny stories,” Mrs. Watson retorted.
“What else do you have?”
15 Nervously, Keisha pulled out her English notebook and opened it to her essay. She read
the title aloud: “Rosa Parks: A Woman of Courage and Conviction.” She glanced at
Mrs. Watson to see what kind of reaction she might have, but to her surprise,
Mrs. Watson’s face had relaxed and her eyes shone with anticipation.
16 “Read to me about Rosa,” Mrs. Watson said.
17 Keisha started to read the essay haltingly, but she soon fell into the natural, dramatic
rhythm of her narrative. She read how Rosa Parks had staunchly refused to give up her
seat on a segregated bus to a white passenger in 1955; then she read how Rosa’s action
had inspired the Montgomery Bus Boycott, a protest that became a turning point in the
struggle for civil rights.
18 After Keisha read her last sentence, she looked at Mrs. Watson’s face. It was lit by a
radiantly happy smile.
19 “I marched in Montgomery too, you know,” Mrs. Watson said with pride. “I walked with
Rosa Parks and Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. The march was the greatest moment of my life
because . . . ” Mrs. Watson paused, seemingly overwhelmed by her memory of the event.
20 Keisha finished the sentence for her. “Because . . . you were a woman of courage and
conviction too.”
21 “Yes,” Mrs. Watson said, sitting up straighter. “Yes, I was a woman of courage and
conviction too, and I still am. Thank you for reminding me, Keisha.”
22 “Mrs. Watson, I’d like to see you again next Thursday, if that’s okay,” Keisha asked, hoping
her voice wasn’t shaking with the emotions she felt.
23 “Next Thursday will be fine, Keisha, just fine,” Mrs. Watson said with a warm smile. “And
next time we see each other, I’ll tell you some of my stories.”
24 “I’d like that,” Keisha answered. “I’d like that very much.”
8
2 In paragraph 9, the word belligerent means —
F hostile or argumentative
G strangely familiar
H weak or exhausted
J strongly determined
1 What does the word anecdotes mean in paragraph 3?
A strange pictures
B personal stories
C school assignments
D community projects
3 In paragraphs 9–12, the description of Mrs. Watson presents her as —
A content and busy
B angry and lonely
C eager to make new friends
D determined to leave the center
9
4 In paragraph 15, Mrs. Watson’s eyes suggest that she is —
F interested
G annoyed
H ashamed
J impressed
5 From paragraph 22, the reader may
best conclude that Keisha —
A does not plan to visit Mrs. Watson again
B wishes that Mrs. Watson was nicer
C does not think Mrs. Watson likes her
D feels affectionate toward Mrs. Watson
6 The reader may
best infer that Mrs. Watson —
F did volunteer work when she was a teenager
G was expecting to see her daughter instead of Keisha
H faced discrimination when she was young
J was relieved when Keisha finally finished her visit
10
8 Mrs. Ellis wishes Keisha luck before her visit with Mrs. Watson because —
F Keisha is a shy person
G Mrs. Watson needs a visitor
H Keisha is feeling nervous
J Mrs. Watson can be difficult
7 The tone of this story is —
A critical
B sorrowful
C respectful
D suspenseful
9 Readers may find this story inspiring because a —
A girl enjoys learning about her heroes
B woman prefers spending time by herself
C girl helps someone feel appreciated
D woman moves to be near her daughter
11
10 The reader may
best conclude that Mrs. Watson —
F participated in the Montgomery Bus Boycott
G was pleased to move away from Alabama
H wants to write about her experiences in Montgomery
J still has family members living in Alabama
11 What is the main conflict in this story?
A Mrs. Watson does not like listening to poetry.
B Keisha does not have anything to read to the residents.
C Mrs. Watson does not want any visitors.
D Keisha is not prepared to meet a new resident.
12
Directions: Read the article and answer the questions that follow.
Elephant Refuge
1 Elephants may be the largest land mammals on
Earth, but they have little chance of holding
their own against human progress. In both
Africa and Asia, where elephants live in the
wild, herds are being threatened by changes in
their natural habitats. People are moving into
the elephants’ territories and endangering their
survival. In the country of Sri Lanka, there is
one place where elephants are not only
protected but also respected. It is called the
Elephant Transit Home (ETH), in Udawalawe
National Park. The ETH was established
in 1995.
People Versus Elephants
2 Sri Lanka is an island nation in the Indian Ocean about 20 miles off the southeastern
coast of India. It is a small country, only 274 miles wide and 725 miles long. In 1900
there were 12,000 wild elephants living in Sri Lanka’s tropical environment. Now that
number has dwindled to fewer than 6,000. What caused this devastation? The primary
cause has been the increasing competition between people and elephants for land and
resources.
3 Today, the human population of Sri Lanka has surpassed 20 million. People are bulldozing
forests into farmland. They are building highways over centuries-old elephant migration
routes. Elephants are being squeezed out of their habitats. This change causes turmoil,
resulting in an increased number of conflicts between elephants and humans.
Endangered Baby Elephants
4 The ETH’s mission is to protect and nurture baby elephants that are found injured or living
without their mothers in the wild. In most cases, the baby animals have been separated
from their mothers and their herd. Without the protection of other elephants, the calves
are in danger of perishing.
5 Every year about 30 baby elephants in Sri Lanka need refuge. As many as possible are
brought to the ETH. After what is often a long and difficult journey, the elephant calves
arrive at Udawalawe. There they are given food, shelter, and medical care. Most
importantly, they are given the opportunity to be with other elephants and become part of
a herd. There are normally between 15 and 30 elephants at the home. They range in age
from three weeks to four years old.
A New Home
6 A day at the refuge begins early in the morning when the baby elephants are given their
first feeding of milk. During the course of the day, each baby will drink an average of
13 gallons of milk. Older elephants are fed mostly coconut leaves as well as other native
Sri
Lanka
China
Russia
India
Mongolia
13
plants. Then the elephants are released to roam on the preserve’s land, grazing on the
grass and forming a herd.
7 The cost of caring for the baby elephants is high, especially by Sri Lankan standards. The
ETH spends approximately $125,000 each year on powdered milk for the calves. To help
pay for food and medical supplies the elephants need, the ETH has a foster parent
program. Anyone, even schoolchildren, can become a benefactor by donating money to
care for a baby elephant. While some foster parents are too far away to visit the baby
elephant being cared for at the ETH, local schoolchildren are also participants in the
program. Foster parents can name their adopted elephants, take photographs of them,
and even help release them into the wild.
Return to the Wild
8 At the refuge, workers try to minimize human contact with the elephants. They also try to
maximize bonds between the elephants. The goal of the orphanage is for the elephants
eventually to return to the wild. It usually takes three years for a baby elephant to be
released into its natural habitat. The elephants are released together with other orphans
with whom they have bonded. This program helps them return to the wild as members of
a herd that will communicate with each other and take care of each other.
9 The ETH is considered one of the best animal protection sites in the world. Not only are
the elephants cared for, they are treated with respect and dignity. Most importantly, these
magnificent mammals go back to live in the wild, where they belong.
12 In paragraph 3, surpassed means —
F been estimated to be
G almost reached
H increased beyond
J been growing toward
14
14 In paragraph 3, the word turmoil means a —
F state of commotion
G sense of mystery
H feeling of suspense
J condition of illness
13 In paragraph 3, the author uses the words “bulldozing,” “squeezed out,” and
“conflicts” to show that —
A the baby elephants cannot survive alone
B the loss of elephant habitat is an unfortunate necessity
C human population growth is a threat to elephants
D people are trying to maintain some areas for elephants
15 Which detail could
best be included in the section “Endangered
Baby Elephants”?
A A list of other baby animals that are sometimes separated from their mothers
B A description of how baby elephants become separated from their mothers
C A specific story about a baby elephant that is released from the refuge
D A description of how adult elephants help the babies survive in the wild
15
16 Which question is answered in paragraph 6?
F Who gives the elephants their first feeding?
G What do elephants at the refuge eat?
H How large is the refuge?
J Where does the refuge get the milk for the baby elephants?
17 What is the main idea of the section “Return to the Wild”?
A The ETH needs donations to feed and care for the young elephants.
B Foster parents may help release baby elephants when they are able to survive
without human help.
C Baby elephants are at the ETH for many years before they can be released.
D The objective of the ETH is for elephants to live together in their natural habitats.
18 What tone is created by the author’s word choice in this article?
F Persuasive
G Concerned
H Humorous
J Angry
16
20 Which sentence
best shows the author’s attitude towards elephants?
F In 1900 there were 12,000 wild elephants living in Sri Lanka’s tropical environment.
G Every year about 30 baby elephants in Sri Lanka need refuge.
H Then the elephants are released to roam on the preserve’s land, grazing on the
grass and forming a herd.
J Not only are the elephants cared for, they are treated with respect and dignity.
19 Which is the
best summary of this article?
A Elephants in Asia and Africa are being threatened by people moving into the
elephants’ territories, changing forests into farmland, and building highways over
elephant migration routes.
B In order to help the Sri Lankan elephant population, the Elephant Transit Home
raises baby elephants that are injured or separated from their mothers until they
can be returned to the wild.
C Elephants arrive at the Elephant Transit Home and are given food, shelter, and
medical care, as well as the opportunity to be with other elephants and become
part of a herd.
D Elephant refuges offer foster parent programs where adults and children can adopt
an elephant by donating money to help pay the costs of caring for the elephant
until it can be released back into the wild.
17
21 The author uses section headings to —
A help readers locate specific information
B state an opinion to be supported with details
C make the article more appealing to the eye
D build suspense about the ideas that follow
18
Directions: Read the story and answer the questions that follow.
Waiting on Progress
1 Waiting for Pa to bring home our new truck, Mama dressed Billy and Claire as if they were
going to a party. When Mama finished, she brushed her long hair, tied it in a knot, and
removed her apron. Usually, Mama took off her apron only for weddings or funerals. She
wanted me to wear my dress shirt and tie, but I didn’t. We had a big order of lumber
going to Mr. Heger the next day, and I was working harder than usual because Pa had
been gone for two days. Putting on my good clothes just didn’t make any sense to me.
2 About one o’clock, while finishing our lunch, we heard honking like a hungry goose. We all
jumped up and ran outside to greet Pa and the new truck—the first motor vehicle owned
by the Singleton family.
3 I’m not sure if the truck really was beautiful or if I just wanted it to be, but as far as I
was concerned, its deep red glow put Grandma’s ruby ring to shame. The headlamps
shone the same as our best china, and the wooden sides gleamed so brightly that they
hurt my eyes. I had never seen anything so exquisite.
4 Billy and Claire climbed on the running board and reached through the window to hug Pa’s
neck. He’d never been away for two whole days before. Then Billy spotted the bag of
licorice in Pa’s pocket, and he and Claire rushed off to divide the pieces between them.
5 “Do we have to share with Joe too?” Billy shouted.
6 I shook my head “no” toward Pa, and he called out, “No, it’s all for you two kids.”
7 I tried not smiling, but I did. Candy was for kids; trucks were for grownups. Pa and I were
thinking alike for once.
8 “The truck’s real nice, Ed,” Mama said, but Pa couldn’t hear her over the motor. He turned
off the motor, and the chugging sound sputtered, whispered, and then stopped.
9 I walked around the truck twice and then climbed into the passenger seat. Pa was in no
hurry to give up his seat. We sat in satisfied silence for several minutes before Pa said we
had to finish sawing the lumber for Mr. Heger. He started the motor again, and I rode with
him while he pulled into the barn. We hadn’t owned more than a single milk cow and a
pair of work horses for several years, so the barn was mostly empty.
10 The next morning I woke earlier than usual to help load the lumber, but I didn’t beat Pa
outside. He was already hard at work. With the strength and grace of a prizefighter, he
lifted four boards at a time and slid them into our old gray wagon.
11 “What about the truck?” I asked, stunned that Pa wasn’t loading the new vehicle.
12 “It’s in the barn,” Pa said.
13 “Why aren’t we loading it?”
19
14 He didn’t answer. He just kept bending down and picking up lumber.
15 “Pa?”
16 “We have a big load to deliver. Real heavy. We’ll use the wagon.”
17 I was disconcerted and didn’t know what to say. I remembered how Uncle Ray and I had
spent a full year talking Pa into buying a truck. Uncle Ray finally convinced Pa that big
companies he was submitting bids to would feel better giving contracts to a man with a
truck. “It’s all about progress, Ed,” Uncle Ray said. “A truck says something about a
business. A truck shows you know where things are heading, and you’re heading there
too.”
18 I wasn’t sure about Uncle Ray’s thinking, so I worked on Pa from another direction. “The
truck can carry twice as much as our wagon,” I said. “We’ll finish much quicker.”
19 That’s the logic that came out of my mouth, but I had a different logic in my head. I was
thinking that fewer trips meant more free time. Boys my age were heading into town in
the evenings and on Saturday afternoons, and I never could go because of the workload.
I imagined joining my friends now that we owned a truck. Maybe I’d even be driving into
town.
20 Pa never slowed. He kept sliding thick boards into the wagon.
21 “I’ll hitch the team,” I finally said, “unless you want me to load.”
22 “Go on,” he said.
23 I walked quickly toward the barn so that I could stop and admire the truck. When I poked
my head inside the barn, I swear that truck smiled, just barely, like Mama when she knew
something about me that I hadn’t even told her.
24 Because for generations our family had struggled and worked hard, I half expected that
truck to talk to me.
25 I think it might have said, “Don’t rush him. I’m in no hurry.”
20
23 Read this sentence from paragraph 3.
The author uses the phrase “put Grandma’s ruby ring to shame” to show —
A the condition of the truck
B embarrassment about the ring
C the brilliant color of the truck
D the type of stone in the ring
I’m not sure if the truck really was
beautiful or if I just wanted it to be, but
as far as I was concerned, its deep red
glow put Grandma’s ruby ring to shame.
22 Read this sentence from paragraph 2.
Which literary device does this sentence contain?
F Personification
G Simile
H Analogy
J Hyperbole
About one o’clock, while finishing our lunch,
we heard honking like a hungry goose.
21
24 Read this sentence from paragraph 9.
The author uses the words “satisfied silence” to indicate —
F appreciation of the truck
G the soft sounds of the engine
H the emptiness of the barn
J enjoyment of working in the barn
We sat in satisfied silence for several
minutes before Pa said we had to finish
sawing the lumber for Mr. Heger.
25 Why was the barn mostly empty when the truck pulled into it?
A The horses were hitched to the wagon.
B The load of lumber was placed outside.
C The family owned few animals.
D The barn was cleared to fit the truck.
26 The reader may
best infer that Joe refused the candy because —
F he does not like sweets
G he felt too busy for a treat
H he was full from eating lunch
J he wanted to be considered a grownup
22
28 Complete the following analogy.
Stunned is to amazed as —
F sad is to happy
G elaborate is to plain
H gentle is to calm
J interesting is to confusing
27 The main reason Joe likes the idea of owning a truck is because —
A he would be able to sit next to his father
B it holds more lumber than the wagon
C it would help Pa win more contracts
D he would have more free time
29 What may the reader infer is
most likely to happen in the future?
A Pa will sell the truck because he prefers the wagon.
B Pa will slowly feel comfortable about using the truck.
C Pa will be awarded more contracts.
D Pa will buy another truck for Joe.
23
30 Which sentence
best expresses the theme of the story?
F I shook my head “no” toward Pa, and he called out, “No, it’s all for you two kids.”
G “The truck can carry twice as much as our wagon,” I said.
H “I’ll hitch the team,” I finally said, “unless you want me to load.”
J I think it might have said, “Don’t rush him. I’m in no hurry.”
31 From which point of view is this story written?
A First person, Joe
B First person, Pa
C Third person, limited
D Third person, omniscient
24
Directions: Read the letter and answer the questions that follow.
The Perfect Speaker
Ms. Rilla Wells
President, Parent Teacher Association (PTA)
1234 Constitution Ave.
Fairfax, VA 22610
October 23, 2009
Dear Ms. Wells:
1 In last week’s PTA bulletin, I read that the school is still seeking a speaker for this year’s
eighth-grade awards ceremony. As an eighth-grade student at Eastwood Middle School, I
would like you to please consider asking Ms. Ellen Jackson to give this important address.
I realize that the PTA usually asks a local politician or successful business owner to give
this inspirational talk, but I think Ms. Jackson would be better than any of our past speakers.
2 Ms. Jackson has many fine qualities that make her an excellent choice to speak at the
ceremony. She not only meets the requirement of being a former Eastwood Middle School
student, but she is also a longtime teacher at our school. In fact, Ms. Jackson has been
associated with this school for much of her life. During that time she has learned many
valuable lessons that she passes on to students whenever she can.
3 Eastwood Middle School has many fine teachers, and Ms. Jackson is one of the best.
Although she teaches English, she is a genius at social studies and math too. Her tutoring
sessions are not limited to assignments she has given in her own classes. Ms. Jackson will
help with any assignment for any subject. She has, however, one firm rule: when she
helps, students must work. In other words, Ms. Jackson does not simply supply the
answers; she teaches students how to find the answers for themselves. She can make
difficult concepts seem easy. She patiently explains complicated formulas or confusing
procedures one step at a time. Ms. Jackson’s homework sessions last as long as
necessary. She never ends a session until all students have been helped.
4 Ms. Jackson is more than just a great teacher, though. She supports the students of
Eastwood Middle School in everything they do. She attends band, orchestra, and choir
concerts, and she can be found cheering the Knights to victory at all the school’s athletic
events. When Ms. Jackson is absent from one event, it is because she is attending another
one. Ms. Jackson also volunteers to chaperone school field trips and outings, including
those held during the summer break.
5 She is also a very effective speaker. She knows how to say things in a way that is both
elegant and easy to understand. When she talks to students, Ms. Jackson earns their
respect, even when they do not like what she has to say. She knows how to make people
think and act for themselves. Just as she does in her homework sessions, Ms. Jackson
does not simply tell her students what they should do. Instead, she helps them to make
25
their own decisions. The respect she shows students makes her a very popular teacher.
Ms. Jackson is tough but fair. All students know her expectations.
6 The eighth-grade awards ceremony is an important event for Eastwood Middle School
students. The ceremony symbolizes the end of our days in middle school and the promise
of a bright future. The speaker at this ceremony should be someone who understands
both where the students have been and where they are going. I can think of no one more
qualified than Ms. Jackson. She has had a positive impact on every student in this school.
She has taught our friends, our brothers and sisters, and in some cases, even our parents.
I hope you will consider asking Ms. Jackson to speak at this year’s ceremony.
Sincerely,
Nick Ryan
8th grade student
Eastwood Middle School
32 What does paragraph 3 suggest about the letter writer?
F He finds Ms. Jackson’s tutoring sessions to be easy.
G He respects Ms. Jackson’s tutoring rule.
H He thinks Ms. Jackson’s methods can be frustrating.
J He has had trouble with Ms. Jackson’s assignments.
26
34 What is paragraph 4
mostly about?
F Ms. Jackson’s interest in school sporting events
G Ms. Jackson’s willingness to volunteer for school field trips
H Ms. Jackson’s occasional absence from an extracurricular event
J Ms. Jackson’s support of students outside of the classroom
33 The letter writer repeats the phrase “does not simply” in paragraphs 3 and 5
in order to —
A compare Ms. Jackson with previous awards ceremony speakers
B show that Ms. Jackson does more than what is expected of her
C suggest that Ms. Jackson has a complicated approach to teaching
D compare Ms. Jackson with other teachers at the middle school
27
35 Read this sentence from paragraph 6.
The word bright suggests that the letter writer sees the future as
filled with —
A hope
B challenge
C mystery
D adventure
The ceremony symbolizes the end of our
days in middle school and the promise
of a bright future.
36 Ms. Jackson would be an unusual choice to speak at the Eastwood Middle
School ceremony because she is a —
F member of the Eastwood PTA
G parent of an Eastwood student
H politician in the Eastwood community
J teacher at Eastwood
37 In order to support his request, the letter writer describes —
A how Ms. Jackson became a teacher
B what awards Ms. Jackson has won
C how students perceive Ms. Jackson
D what addresses Ms. Jackson has given
28
38 Which of these is
most likely a lesson that a student might have learned from
Ms. Jackson?
F Real learning takes effort.
G Never settle for second best.
H Some people are naturally bright.
J Seek advice when making decisions.
39 In order to demonstrate Ms. Jackson’s involvement in school functions, the
letter writer mentions —
A drama performances
B speech contests
C musical concerts
D graduation ceremonies
40 Which of these sentences from the letter makes the strongest argument for
Ms. Jackson?
F As an eighth-grade student at Eastwood Middle School, I would like you to please
consider asking Ms. Ellen Jackson to give this important address.
G The eighth-grade awards ceremony is an important event for Eastwood Middle
School students.
H The speaker at this ceremony should be someone who understands both where the
students have been and where they are going.
J I hope you will consider asking Ms. Jackson to speak at this year’s ceremony.
29
41 Ms. Jackson is helpful as a tutor primarily because she is —
A enthusiastic about homework
B knowledgeable in three subjects
C available during the summer
D popular with students
42 Complete the following analogy.
Speaker is to inspire as —
F student is to assist
G teacher is to motivate
H coach is to practice
J parent is to improve
30
43 Which sentence contains the
best example of personification?
A The dog ate its food in exactly thirty seconds.
B Benjamin races across the field like a jackrabbit.
C The sun poked its face through the curtains to brighten the room.
D Nadine was swamped with letters from readers who loved her story.
You do not need to read a passage to answer the following questions. Read and
answer the questions.
44 Read this sentence.
Which of these is a synonym for the word scrutinize?
F reject
G modify
H discount
J inspect
It is important to scrutinize an item before
you purchase it to be certain that it has no
flaws or defects.
45 Which sentence contains a metaphor?
A The moon was a gleaming silver coin in the sky.
B An enormous brown buffalo blundered into the pasture.
C Melinda had waited forever for this day to arrive.
D The watchful eye of the camera captured the scene onstage.
Test Sequence
Number Correct Answer
Reporting
Category Reporting Category Description
1 B 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
2 F 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
3 B 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
4 F 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
5 D 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
6 H 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
7 C 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
8 J 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
9 C 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
10 F 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
11 C 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
12 H 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
13 C 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
14 F 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
15 B 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
16 G 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
17 D 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
18 G 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
19 B 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
20 J 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
21 A 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
22 G 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
23 C 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
24 F 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
25 C 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
26 J 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
27 D 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
28 H 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
29 B 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
30 J 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
31 A 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
32 G 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
33 B 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
34 J 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
35 A 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
36 J 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
37 C 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
38 F 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
39 C 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
40 H 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
41 B 002 Demonstrate comprehension of printed materials
42 G 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
43 C 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
44 J 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
45 A 001 Use word analysis strategies and information resources
Answer Key-8065-R0110
If you get this
many items
correct:
Then your
converted scale
score is:
0 000
1 113
2 158
3 185
4 205
5 221
6 235
7 247
8 257
9 267
10 276
11 284
12 292
13 300
14 307
15 314
16 320
17 327
18 333
19 340
20 346
21 352
22 358
23 364
24 370
25 376
26 383
27 389
28 395
29 402
30 408
31 415
32 422
33 430
34 438
35 446
36 455
37 464
38 475
39 486
40 500
41 516
42 536
43 563
44 600
45 600
Grade 8 Reading, Core 1