The University of the State of New York
REGENTS HIGH SCHOOL EXAMINATION
REGENTS EXAMINATION
IN
ENGLISH LANGUAGE ARTS
Tuesday, January 23, 2024 — 9:15 a.m. to 12:15 p.m., only
REGENTS IN ELA
REGENTS IN ELA
A separate answer sheet has been provided for you. Follow the instructions
for completing the student information on your answer sheet. You must also fill in
the heading on each page of your essay booklet that has a space for it, and write
your name at the top of each sheet of scrap paper.
The examination has three parts. For Part 1, you are to read the texts and
answer all 24 multiple-choice questions. For Part 2, you are to read the texts and
write one source-based argument. For Part 3, you are to read the text and write a
text-analysis response. The source-based argument and text-analysis response should
be written in pen. Keep in mind that the language and perspectives in a text may
reflect the historical and/or cultural context of the time or place in which it was
written.
When you have completed the examination, you must sign the statement
printed at the bottom of the front of the answer sheet, indicating that you had no
unlawful knowledge of the questions or answers prior to the examination and that
you have neither given nor received assistance in answering any of the questions
during the examination. Your answer sheet cannot be accepted if you fail to sign
this declaration.
DO NOT OPEN THIS EXAMINATION BOOKLET UNTIL THE SIGNAL IS GIVEN.
The possession or use of any communications device is strictly prohibited
when taking this examination. If you have or use any communications device,
no matter how briefly, your examination will be invalidated and no score will be
calculated for you.
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [2]
Part 1
Directions (1–24): Closely read each of the three passages below. After each passage, there are several multiple-
choice questions. Select the best suggested answer to each question and record your answer on the separate
answer sheet provided for you. You may use the margins to take notes as you read.
Reading Comprehension Passage A
The Accursed House
In this excerpt from a short story, the landlord of an apartment building lowers the rent
and the tenants react in an unexpected manner.
The Vicomte1 de B—, an amiable and charming young man, was peacefully enjoying an
income of 30,000 livres yearly, when, unfortunately for him, his uncle, a miser of the worst
species, died, leaving him all his wealth, amounting to nearly two millions.
In running through the documents of succession, the Vicomte de B— learned that he
was the proprietor of a house in the Rue de la Victoire. He learned, also, that the
unfurnished building, bought in 1849 for 300,000 francs, now brought in, clear of taxes,
rentals of 82,000 francs a year.
“Too much, too much, entirely,” thought the generous vicomte, “my uncle was too hard;
to rent at this price is usury,2 one can not deny it. When one bears a great name like mine,
one should not lend himself to such plundering. I will begin tomorrow to lower rents, and
my tenants will bless me.”
With this excellent purpose in view, the Vicomte de B— sent immediately for the
concièrge3 of the building, who presented himself as promptly, with back bent like a bow.
“Bernard, my friend,” said the vicomte, “go at once from me and notify all your tenants
that I lower their rents by one-third.”
That unheard-of word “lower” fell like a brick on Bernard’s head. But he quickly
recovered himself; he had heard badly; he had not understood.
“Low—er the rents!” stammered he. “Monsieur le Vicomte deigns to jest. Lower!
Monsieur, of course means to raise the rents.”
“I was never more serious in my life, my friend,” the vicomte returned; “I said, and
repeat, lower the rents.”
This time the concièrge was surprised to the point of bewilderment—so thrown off his
balance that he forgot himself and lost all restraint.
“Monsieur has not reflected,” persisted he. “Monsieur will regret this evening. Lower
the tenants’ rents! Never was such a thing known, monsieur! If the lodgers should learn of
it, what would they think of monsieur? What would people say in the neighborhood?
Truly—” …
Staggering like a drunken man, Monsieur Bernard went out from the house of his
proprietor. …
Next morning, Bernard, buttoning himself into his best frock coat, made the rounds of
the three-and-twenty apartments to announce his great news.
1Vicomte — a French title of nobility
2usury — robbery
3concièrge — superintendent
10
5
15
20
25
30
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [3] [OVER]
Ten minutes afterward the house in the Rue de la Victoire was in a state of commotion
impossible to describe. People who, for forty years had lived on the same floor, and never
honored each other with so much as a tip of the hat, now clustered together and chatted
eagerly.
“Do you know, monsieur?”
“It is very extraordinary.”
“Simply unheard of!”
“The proprietor’s lowered my rent!”
“One-third, is it not? Mine also.”
“Astounding! It must be a mistake!” …
Three of them actually wrote to the proprietor to tell him what had passed, and to
charitably warn him that his concièrge had wholly lost his mind. The proprietor responded
to these skeptics, confirming what Bernard had said.
Then began reflections and commentaries.
“Why had the proprietor lowered his rents?”
“Yes, why?”
“What motives,” said they all, “actuate this strange man? For certainly he must have
grave reasons for a step like this! An intelligent man, a man of good sense, would never
deprive himself of good fat revenues, well secured, for the simple pleasure of depriving
himself. One would not conduct himself thus without being forced, constrained4 by
powerful circumstances.”
And each said to himself:
“There is something under all this!”
“But what?”
And from the first floor to the sixth they sought and conjectured5 and delved in their
brains. Every lodger had the preoccupied air of a man who strives with all his wits to solve
an impossible cipher,6 and everywhere there began to be a vague disquiet, as it happens
when one finds himself in the presence of a sinister mystery.
Some one went so far as to hazard:
“This man must have committed a great and still hidden crime; remorse pushes him to
philanthropy.”7
It was not a pleasant idea, either, the thought of living thus side by side with a rascal;
no, by no means; he might be repentant, and all that, but suppose he yielded to temptation
once more!
“The house, perhaps, was badly built?” questioned another, anxiously.
Hum-m, so-so! no one could tell; but all knew one thing—it was very old!
“True! and it had been necessary to prop it when they dug the drain last year in the
month of March.”
“Maybe it was the roof, then, and the house is top-heavy?” suggested a tenant on the
fifth floor.
“Or perhaps,” said a lodger in the garret,8 “there is a press for coining counterfeit
money in the cellar; I have often heard at night a sound like the dull, muffled thud of a
coin-stamper.” …
4constrained — controlled
5conjectured — guessed
6cipher — code
7philanthropy — helping others
8garret — attic
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [4]
Then began to happen, as they all declared, extraordinary and even frightful things.
On the sixth and mansard floors9 it appeared that strange and absolutely inexplicable noises
were heard. Then the nurse of the old lady on the fourth story, going one night to steal wine
from the cellar, encountered the ghost of the defunct proprietor—he even held in his hand
a receipt for rent.
And the refrain from aloft to cellar was:
“There is something under all this!”
From disquietude10 it had come to fright; from fright it quickly passed to terror. So that
the gentleman of the first floor, who had valuables in his rooms, made up his mind to go,
and sent in notice by his clerk. …
From that moment it was a general rout.11 By the end of the week, everybody had given
notice. Every one awaited some frightful catastrophe. They slept no more. They organized
patrols. The terrified domestics swore that they too would quit the accursed house and
remained temporarily only on tripled wages.
Bernard was no more than the ghost of himself; the fever of fear had worn him to a
shadow. …
Meanwhile three-and-twenty “For Rent” placards swung against the façade of the
house, drawing an occasional applicant for lodgings.
Bernard—never grumbling now—climbed the staircase and ushered the visitor from
apartment to apartment.
“You can have your choice,” said he “the house is entirely vacant; all the tenants have
given notice as one man. They do not know why, exactly, but things have happened, oh! yes,
things! a mystery such as was never before known—the proprietor has lowered his rents!”
And the would-be lodgers fled away affrighted.
The term ended, three-and-twenty vans carried away the furniture of the three-and-twenty
tenants. Everybody left. From foundations to garret, the house lay empty of lodgers. …
And now on the Rue de la Victoire stands the abandoned house, “The Accursed House,”
whose history I have told you. Dust thickens upon the closed slats, grass grows in the court.
No tenant ever presents himself now; and in the quarter, where stands this Accursed
House, so funereal is its reputation that even the neighboring houses on either side of it
have also depreciated in value.
Lower one’s rents!! Who would think of such a thing!!!
—Emile Gaboriau
excerpted from “The Accursed House”
Famous Stories, June 1937
Review of Reviews Corporation
9mansard floors — top story
10disquietude — uneasiness
11rout — retreat
90
85
100
95
105
75
80
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [5] [OVER]
1 Lines 8 through 11 reveal the
(1) tenants’ pride in the vicomte’s noble heritage
(2) tenants’ appreciation of the vicomte’s good
fortune
(3) vicomte’s respect for his uncle’s wishes
(4) vicomte’s motivation for his novel decision
2 The similes in lines 16 and 28 emphasize Bernard’s
(1) shock at the vicomte’s ideas
(2) exhaustion from his duties
(3) impatience with the tenants
(4) disregard of the vicomte’s demand
3 Which statement indicates that Bernard feels the
vicomte may have acted impulsively?
(1) “But he quickly recovered himself; he had
heard badly” (lines 16 and 17)
(2) “ ‘Monsieur, of course means to raise the
rents’ ” (line 19)
(3) “ ‘Monsieur has not reflected,’ persisted he”
(line 24)
(4) “One would not conduct himself thus
without being forced” (line 51)
4 A central idea reflected in lines 32 through 41 is
that people
(1) are easily satisfied
(2) are suspicious of change
(3) accept gifts graciously
(4) reveal secrets of others
5 The repetition of the statement in lines 54 and 81
reinforces a shift from
(1) discomfort to comfort
(2) complaint to praise
(3) fear to trust
(4) uncertainty to certainty
6 As used in line 60, the word “hazard” most likely
means to
(1) suggest that (3) ignore that
(2) rule out that (4) require proof that
7 Lines 61 through 74 reveal that the tenants are
(1) making excuses for the vicomte’s rude
behavior
(2) imagining reasons why the vicomte lowered
the rents
(3) investigating the history of the building
(4) accusing one another of crimes
8 As used in line 85, the phrase “general rout”
indicates that the tenants are
(1) seeking revenge (3) acting irrationally
(2) being frugal (4) being responsible
9 Which statement reflects a conclusion based on
the text?
(1) Poor communication can generate hysterical
behavior.
(2) Clear communication facilitates mutual
benefits.
(3) Good intentions can create positive effects.
(4) Negative experiences foster group hostility.
10 Which quotation best reflects a central idea in
the passage?
(1) “He learned, also, that the unfurnished
building, bought in 1849 for 300,000 francs,
now brought in, clear of taxes, rentals of
82,000 francs a year.” (lines 5 through 7)
(2) “With this excellent purpose in view, the
Vicomte de B— sent immediately for the
concièrge of the building, who presented
himself as promptly, with back bent like a
bow.” (lines 12 and 13)
(3) “Staggering like a drunken man, Monsieur
Bernard went out from the house of his
proprietor.” (lines 28 and 29)
(4) “ ‘What motives,’ said they all, ‘actuate this
strange man? For certainly he must have
grave reasons for a step like this!’ ” (lines 48
and 49)
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [6]
Reading Comprehension Passage B
The Sound of Snow
Snow falls in the dusk of Connecticut. The stranger
Looks up to the glutenous sky, and it is remembrance
That tickles the end of his nose like the fingertips
Of a child and remembrance that touches the end of his
Tongue with the antique purity and coolness of the snow,
As if this were almost the beginning, the first snowstorm
Fluttering between his house and the serious hemlocks.1
And best of all is the sound of snow in the stillness,
A susurration,2 the minute percussion of settling flakes;
And the stranger listens, intent to the whispering snow
In the fir boughs, earth’s most intimate confiding,
And he thinks that this is the time of sweet cognizance3
As it was once when the house, graying in old dusk,
Knew him and sang to him, before the house forgot.
In the last moments of day the earth and the sky
Close in the veils of snow that flutter around him,
Shutting him in the sphere of the storm, where he stands
In his elephantine galoshes,4 peering this way and that
At the trees in their aloofness and the nameless house
Vanishing into the dark; and he stamps his feet urgently,
Turning as if in anger away from an evil companion.
Yet when, like a warning just at the fall of darkness,
Yellow light cries from the window above in the house,
From the boy’s room, from the old sixteen-paned window,
The stranger remembers the boy who sits in the light
And turns the glass sphere, watching to see the snowstorm
Whirling inside. And the stranger shivers and listens
To the tranquil and lucid5 whispering of the snow.
—Hayden Carruth
“The Sound of Snow”
from Collected Shorter Poems 1946–1991, 1992
Copper Canyon Press
1hemlocks — evergreen trees
2susurration — murmuring
3cognizance — awareness
4galoshes — rubber boots
5lucid — clear
10
5
15
20
25
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [7] [OVER]
11 In the first stanza, the stranger is vividly reminded
of the
(1) power he felt during snowstorms in
Connecticut
(2) enjoyment he found playing in fresh snow as
a child
(3) relief he found in the winter snow in
Connecticut
(4) sensations he experienced during snowfall as
a child
12 In the context of the poem, the personification in
lines 13 and 14 serves to
(1) establish the stranger’s connection with the
house
(2) transform the stranger’s feelings about the
house
(3) illustrate the stranger’s dim memory of the
house
(4) reveal the stranger’s obscured view of the
house
13 The references to “the sphere of the storm” (line
17) and “the glass sphere” (line 26) create a link
between the stranger’s
(1) health and illness
(2) acceptance and rejection
(3) present and past
(4) insight and confusion
14 Lines 15 through 21 signal the stranger’s
(1) changing attitude towards the storm
(2) increasing confidence about finding his way
(3) developing sense of control over the storm
(4) growing disinterest in continuing his journey
Reading Comprehension Passage C
Crikey!
This excerpt from an article presents information regarding Australian saltwater crocodiles.
…Bindi and Robert are the offspring of Steve Irwin, the boisterous, can-do naturalist
of “Crocodile Hunter” fame. Perpetually clad in khaki shorts and hiking boots, the elder
Irwin’s shtick1—provocative,2 up-close interactions with wild animals and squeals of
wonderment (“Crikey!”) at their magnificent deadliness—made him an international TV
phenomenon. Irwin’s encounters with lethal animals ended in 2006, when a stingray’s barb
pierced his heart while he was filming on the Great Barrier Reef. He was 44. …
What’s perhaps surprising is that Irwin, though controversial for his flamboyant hands-
on approach to wildlife, quietly teamed with serious scientists and conservationists to make
a genuine contribution to the systematic natural history of this enigmatic3 critter [the
saltwater crocodile]. Their discoveries about the salties’ habits, homing abilities and private
lives have prompted a rethink of how they live and how we can coexist with them. Adult
crocs have no natural predators except people, possibly because we’re meaner. …
The research project that Irwin helped launch is led by Craig Franklin, a University of
Queensland [Australia] zoologist, who, using capture techniques developed by the Croc
Hunter, has trapped, tagged and released scores of salties in Aussie waterways. Data
gathered by satellite and acoustic telemetry is beamed to a Brisbane lab, which maps the
beasts’ whereabouts and logs their dive times and depths. The project is bankrolled by the
Irwins’ zoo, federal grants and private donors—a little over $6,000 gets you the “exclusive
naming rights” to a wild, caught croc.
Far from being just sedentary, solitary animals with one dominant male defending a set
territory, as once thought, salties also turn out to be far-ranging creatures with complex
social hierarchies. “Crocodiles are misunderstood because they’re not cute and fluffy,” says
Bindi, a mainstay of Franklin’s annual field trips since Day 1. …
Aboriginal people have traditionally hunted crocodiles for their meat, but the animal’s
population remained stable until World War II ended and high-powered rifles became
widely available. Commercial hunters and trigger-happy sportsmen slaughtered them
indiscriminately. Since given protection in Australia during the early 1970s, their numbers
have rebounded, then boomed to about 100,000.
1shtick — style of performance
2provocative — exciting
3enigmatic — puzzling
20
10
5
15
25
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [8]
Of the 23 crocodilian species, two inhabit the rivers, billabongs4 and mangrove swamps
of the Australian tropics: the freshwater, or Johnson’s, crocodile, which is relatively
harmless, and the formidable estuarine, or saltwater, croc, which can grow to 20 feet in
length and weigh more than a ton. The range of the two overlaps somewhat, and sometimes
the bigger and far more aggressive saltie will make a hearty lunch of the freshie.
Robert Irwin got it right: Salties are ruthlessly efficient killing machines. They come
equipped with nearly 70 interlocking teeth, many as sharp as a steak knife. If one breaks off,
there’s another underneath to replace it. Numerous muscles close the brute’s jaws but only
a few open them.
Over the last 70 million years not much has changed in the saltie’s evolutionary design.
This archosaurian behemoth5 can see well by day and by night and has three pairs of
eyelids, one of which functions like swimming goggles to protect the croc’s vision
underwater. Another membrane holds the tongue in place, preventing water from filling the
lungs, which is why, even in contempt, the crocodile can’t stick it out.
Salties stalk their quarry6 with deadly patience—over days if necessary—learning its
habits and feeding times. The croc skulks below the surface near the water’s edge, poised
to ambush anything it can clamp those jaws on—cattle, wild boar, kangaroos, even other
crocodiles as they come to drink. In a constant state of awareness, they’ll reveal themselves
and strike only when confident of success. …
If a crocodile needs to sink in a hurry, it can move its larger internal organs to the back
of its body, like a submarine shifting ballast.7 Franklin and [colleague, Michael] Axelsson
proposed that the cogged-teeth valves allow crocs to ration oxygen underwater and stay
submerged for hours.
In 2004, Franklin and Irwin joined forces with Australia’s parks and wildlife department
to launch Crocs in Space, the first published satellite-tracking study of wild crocodiles.
Dozens of adult salties were seized, restrained and outfitted with satellite transmitters to
keep tabs on them.
Over the years, researchers have determined that saltwater crocs can hold their breath
for nearly seven hours and dive to 23 feet; that they’re capable of walking miles overland
between waterholes; that nesting mothers check out potential nests weeks before laying
eggs; that dominant males maximize reproductive success, while subordinate males roam
hundreds of miles of waterway, possibly in search of unguarded females.
“To me,” says Bindi, “their nomadic behavior is so, so fascinating.”
Salties, she notes, invest considerable parental care in the rearing of their young.
The female digs them out of the nest when they start chirping and gently rolls the eggs in
her mouth to assist hatching. Gingerly, if not tenderly, she carries her darlings to the water’s
edge and remains at their side for several months. “Adorable!” Bindi says. What she loves
most about the research study is that you can track a crocodile for ten years, and “learn all
its secrets.” Some are caught and recaught and recaught again. “It’s kind of like seeing an
old friend. You become attached to an individual and watch it grow and observe all its
changes. It becomes part of your family. Imagine that: a dinosaur in your family! This is our
purpose—catching prehistoric creatures and learning to share what we’ve learned with the
world. And maybe, just maybe, someone listens and thinks, ‘Dinosaurs are extinct! These
guys are so precious.’ ” …
4billabongs — lakes or isolated ponds
5archosaurian behemoth — a huge descendant of dinosaurs
6quarry — prey
7ballast — weights used to balance a ship
40
45
50
55
60
65
30
35
70
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [9] [OVER]
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [10]
15 Lines 1 through 12 reveal that Steve Irwin
sought to
(1) manage wild animal living areas
(2) educate the public about wild animals
(3) protect the public from wild animals
(4) control wild animal predatory behaviors
16 Steve Irwin was able to use his television fame to
(1) initiate crocodile research projects
(2) purchase crocodiles for zoos
(3) develop crocodile breeding techniques
(4) fund crocodile hunting preserves
17 As used in line 20, the word “sedentary” most
nearly means
(1) living in large groups
(2) remaining in one location
(3) easy to aggravate
(4) hard to capture
18 Which lines best support the idea that some
crocodiles “are ruthlessly efficient killing
machines” (line 34)?
(1) “the formidable estuarine, or saltwater, croc,
which can grow to 20 feet in length and
weigh more than a ton” (lines 31 and 32)
(2) “Another membrane holds the tongue in
place, preventing water from filling the
lungs” (lines 41 and 42)
(3) “The croc skulks below the surface near the
water’s edge, poised to ambush anything it
can clamp those jaws on” (lines 44 and 45)
(4) “it can move its larger internal organs to the
back of its body” (lines 48 and 49)
19 Lines 43 through 47 emphasize crocodiles’
(1) impulsive search for prey
(2) limited selection of prey
(3) techniques for hunting prey
(4) methods for frightening prey
Herpetologists8 had long wondered how salties—notoriously poor long-distance
swimmers—have inhabited so many South Pacific islands separated by wide expanses of
ocean. But data gathered by Franklin and others revealed that during long voyages, the
crocs ride surface currents, like surfers catching waves or migratory birds using thermal
columns. In contrast, on jaunts of 6.2 miles or less the crocs under observation were just as
likely to travel with or against the flow. …
Salties’ uncanny ability to find their way home after being relocated, which Franklin and
coworkers have documented in several studies, remains something of a mystery. Perhaps,
Franklin speculates, “they swim around when released and realign themselves in their
environment by celestial navigation or geomagnetic cues.”
Such findings proved significant because moving salties from one place to another, a
practice known as translocation, has been used in Queensland to manage potential safety
risks posed by the animals. “Our experiment showed that translocation was ineffective and
extremely dangerous,” Franklin says. Residents and tourists got a false sense that the waters
were crocodile-free. The government abandoned its program in 2011. …
“It’s up to us to learn to live with crocs,” she [Bindi] says. “After all, they were here first.”
—Franz Lidz
excerpted and adapted from “Crikey!”
Smithsonian, March 2015
8herpetologists — scientists who study reptiles and amphibians
80
85
75
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [11] [OVER]
20 The implementation of “Crocs in Space” (line 53)
is important to crocodile research because it
(1) supports relocation efforts by predicting
crocodile migratory paths
(2) provides video and sound feedback of
crocodile social interactions
(3) is responsible for protecting researchers who
study crocodile habitats
(4) is capable of tracking and recording
crocodile movements for several years
21 As used in line 64, “Gingerly” most nearly means
(1) quickly (3) cautiously
(2) eagerly (4) separately
22 The description of crocodile behavior in lines
56 through 68 contributes to a central idea by
emphasizing the
(1) responsibilities males share in raising their
young
(2) care females show in nurturing their young
(3) subordinate role played by females
(4) courtship rituals employed by males
23 Lines 79 through 87 reveal that the practice of
translocation in Queensland was ultimately
(1) unsuccessful (3) popular
(2) practical (4) uneconomical
24 Which statement best expresses a central idea of
the text?
(1) “Aboriginal people have traditionally hunted
crocodiles for their meat” (line 24)
(2) “Of the 23 crocodilian species, two inhabit
the rivers, billabongs and mangrove swamps
of the Australian tropics” (lines 29 and 30)
(3) “And maybe, just maybe, someone listens
and thinks, ‘Dinosaurs are extinct! These
guys are so precious’ ” (lines 71 and 72)
(4) “Residents and tourists got a false sense that
the waters were crocodile-free” (lines 86 and
87)
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [12]
Part 2
Argument
Directions: Closely read each of the four texts provided on pages 13 through 20 and write a source-based
argument on the topic below. You may use the margins to take notes as you read and scrap paper to plan your
response. Write your argument beginning on page 1 of your essay booklet.
Topic: Should English curriculum focus on the classics?
Your Task: Carefully read each of the four texts provided. Then, using evidence from at least three of the texts,
write a well-developed argument regarding whether or not English curriculum should focus on the
classics. Clearly establish your claim, distinguish your claim from alternate or opposing claims, and use
specific, relevant, and sufficient evidence from at least three of the texts to develop your argument. Do not
simply summarize each text.
Guidelines:
Be sure to:
• Establish your claim regarding whether or not English curriculum should focus on the classics
• Distinguish your claim from alternate or opposing claims
• Use specific, relevant, and sufficient evidence from at least three of the texts to develop your argument
• Identify each source that you reference by text number and line number(s) or graphic (for example:
Text 1, line 4 or Text 2, graphic)
• Organize your ideas in a cohesive and coherent manner
• Maintain a formal style of writing
• Follow the conventions of standard written English
Texts:
Text 1 – The Reading Wars: Choice vs. Canon
Text 2 – Why Kids and Teens Need Diverse Books and Our Recommended Reads
Text 3 – Classic Works of Literature Still Have a Place in Today’s Classrooms
Text 4 – Giving High School Students the Tools to Question Classic Literature
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [13] [OVER]
Text 1
The Reading Wars: Choice vs. Canon1
The day I arrive for the school-wide “Read-In” this past spring, teenagers and books are
covering every available surface in Jarred Amato’s English classroom at Maplewood High
School in Nashville, Tennessee—flung across lived-in couches, desks, and chairs. But there’s
not a book one might traditionally identify as a “classic” in sight, and that’s by design.
In the middle of the room, a group of girls are cracking open the third installment of
March, the graphic novel by Rep. [Representative] John Lewis and Andrew Aydin about the
civil rights movement, when a student pushes his way through. “Hey, get out of my way,” he
says playfully to the girls, grabbing a copy off the top of the stack. “I’ve wanted to read
March!”
Things weren’t always this way. Four years ago, when Amato arrived at Maplewood High, he
assigned his freshmen Lord of the Flies—a staple of high school lit [literature] classes for more
than 50 years—but he couldn’t get students to read the book. “It’s a classic for some reason, but
I don’t know what that reason is. Because it’s not good,” says Calvin, a graduating senior, who
laughed when I asked if he finished it.
Frustrated, Amato surveyed students about their reading preferences and found that
most didn’t know: They almost never read outside of school and generally had negative
attitudes about reading. Many students felt like the books they were assigned at school didn’t
reflect their experiences, and featured characters who didn’t look, think, or talk like them.
The issue of a disconnect between young readers and the books they’re assigned isn’t
new, though. Like previous generations, American middle and high school students have
continued to spend English class reading from a similar and familiar list from the English and
American literature canon: Steinbeck, Dickens, Fitzgerald, Alcott, and, of course,
Shakespeare.
But now, as social attitudes and population demographics2 have shifted, teachers across
the country are saying that the disconnect between the canon and its intended audience has
become an epidemic, driven by rapid changes in the composition of American schools and
the emergence of always-on digital platforms that vie for kids’ attention. By middle and high
school, teachers concede, many of today’s students simply aren’t reading at all. …
To Amato and a growing number of teachers, the solution has been to move away from
classics in English class and instead let students choose the books they read, while
encouraging literature that is more reflective of the demographics and experiences of
students in America’s classrooms. In teacher training programs, in professional publications,
and throughout social media, choice reading has become a refrain that can sometimes sound
like dogma,3 and for some it has become a call for advocacy.4
But while the student choice reading movement is growing, it is by no means universally
accepted or supported in all classrooms. Other educators have warily pushed back on the
approach, worrying that too much student choice is putting young adult (YA) and graphic
novels—not highly regarded and vetted5 literature—at the center of the English literature
curriculum. While not all books are enjoyable (or easy) to read, challenging books help boost
1canon — a collection of writings considered to be the most important or influential
2population demographics — characteristics such as age, gender, ethnicity, and socio-economic status
3dogma — accepted beliefs
4advocacy — support
5vetted — critically examined
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [14]
students’ comprehension and reading proficiency, they argue, and force them to grapple6
with difficult, timeless questions about love, life and death, and societal dynamics. …
Doug Lemov, an educator and managing director of the Uncommon Schools charter
network, tells me a story of visiting a special school for elite soccer athletes a few years ago.
Looking around the room, he noticed that many students in their choice-based English
classes had selected books about soccer. “They should not be reading books about soccer. All
they know is soccer,” says Lemov, who, along with coauthors Colleen Driggs and Erica
Woolway, has written Reading Reconsidered, a book that pushes back on choice reading.
Lemov believes that student choice reading has been overhyped by schools and makes a
couple of assumptions that don’t add up: First, that adolescents know enough about books
to know what they like to read; and second, that there’s greater power in the freedom to “do
your own thing” rather than in developing a deep understanding of what you’re reading. …
And though it may not foster a love of reading, the data also shows that teacher-led
explicit instruction in reading a particular text (especially in different genres), combined with
lots of reading, can reap four to eight times the payoff compared with students’ choosing
books and reading on their own, according to Timothy Shanahan, founding director of the
Center for Literacy at the University of Illinois at Chicago. …
Yet while the data suggests that we are failing to interest many of today’s students in
reading, it seems that educators are starting to find some equilibrium between choice and a
regimented list of must-reads: Shakespeare can exist in class alongside books kids want to
read. …
—Holly Korbey
excerpted and adapted from “The Reading Wars: Choice vs. Canon”
www.edutopia.org, July 9, 2019
6grapple — struggle
45
40
50
55
60
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [15] [OVER]
Text 2
Why Kids and Teens Need Diverse Books and Our Recommended Reads
Think back to your middle or high school English class and the books you read. Great
Gatsby? Lord of the Flies? Maybe 1984 or Les Misérables? While those are all important
works, the literary canon has long been dominated by white authors, white perspectives,
white characters — and those voices are often male. There are so many other voices we need
to hear from. …
Diversity and engagement...
Instead of perpetuating the idea that so-called “classics” are the only literature belonging
in classrooms — and steadily distancing our modern students from the joys of literature —
isn’t it time we ensure that the fiction we teach matches the world in which we live? In the
last decade, the young adult and children’s markets have noticeably expanded their offerings
of diverse authors, characters, and stories. …
It’s logical to argue that students would be more engaged if they saw themselves
represented in literature. After all, what is literature but a mirror of human experience?
Reading the classics is wonderful, but solely providing stories about unrecognizable
characters in time periods long past restricts the interconnection and inspiration our young
people can and should feel from reading.
“It’s important that more books by authors of color featuring diverse characters make it
into schools because all students (no matter their race, ethnicity, or sexual background) should
be able to relate to the characters in novels and see that their culture is being represented
in literature,” says Tiffany Brownlee, author of Wrong in All the Right Ways, a modern YA
retelling of Brontë’s Wuthering Heights. “As a teacher, I always try to look for ways to include
novels by authors of color in my curriculum to expose my students to different lifestyles and
cultures that they wouldn’t normally be exposed to. And you’d be surprised at how high the
level of engagement can rise when a student’s race or culture is being taught in class. Let me
just say, it soars!”
“Reading engagement is the foundation for building successful readers and a strong
literacy environment,” says Carrie Kondor, EdD, Associate Professor and Reading
Endorsement Chair at Concordia University-Portland. “Diverse books are an essential
component of increasing reading achievement for all students because of engagement. As
humans, we seek out and enjoy connections. Students must have the opportunity to engage
in texts that relate to their experiences, their cultures, and their interests.”
Empathy1 and representation
Studies have shown that reading fiction builds empathy. A 2013 study in the American
Psychological Association’s journal Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts
discovered that when readers visualize scenes while reading stories, there is an actual and
measurable surge of empathy. Imagine then the impact if schools were full of diverse books
— providing a literary peek into the lives of not only students themselves but of those around
them. …
Relevant stories for teens
In the throes2 of adolescence, literature can deeply impact one’s emotional development
and the way you see the world. “I think teen readers of realistic fiction want to read books
where what is going on in the world is reflected back to them,” says Renée Watson, author
1empathy — an understanding of others’ feelings and experiences
2throes — struggle
20
25
30
35
10
5
15
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [16]
of numerous books including Piecing Me Together, which received a Coretta Scott King
Award and a Newbery Honor. “As an author, I want to create work that helps young people
face and cope with reality, not escape it. I believe books that center around children who are
often underrepresented in literature affirms their experiences and whispers to them, ‘You are
not alone, your story matters.’ ”
In an era of technological devices and near-constant stimulation, diversity in literature
may be a pathway toward keeping literature relevant. “Relatable topics and topics of personal
interest get teens to put down their phones and pick up a book. Anything that appeals to
their personal lives and interests (romantic/friend-based/familial relationships/fantastical
worlds/the LGBTQ community/etc.) makes a teen want to read,” says author Tiffany
Brownlee. “When the teen can relate to what they’re reading through the characters (with
an emphasis on characters with diverse backgrounds), settings, or topics discussed in the
book, it suddenly becomes so much more engaging for them. They get more out of a text
when their diverse backgrounds are represented, and that’s what’s important. Not just getting
them to read, but getting them to take something away from that experience, too.”
—The Room 241 Team
excerpted from “Why Kids and Teens Need Diverse Books and Our
Recommended Reads”
https://education.cu-portland.edu, September 8, 2018
45
40
50
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [17] [OVER]
Text 3
Classic Works of Literature Still Have a Place in Today’s Classrooms
When introducing literature to a new class I ask two questions: “Why do we study it and
what can we learn from it?” Now, if you’re a teacher you’ll know that it’s not always a smooth
ride to the final destination, which is all part of the fun, but the answer we usually get to,
albeit with teacher sat-nav [satellite-navigation] switched on, is that through literature, we can
visit cultures impossible for us to experience ourselves. From our reading, we can begin to
understand what it must have been like to live in a particular time, under certain conditions,
in different parts of the world. But the best bit is that we can do all this while honing1 those
oh-so-necessary and desired critical-thinking skills.
And that’s the point: that the study of literature in the contemporary classroom is,
perhaps, even more relevant today than it has ever been. So, back in September when the
Secret Teacher [a teacher blog] posted that the Alan Bennett monologue A Cream Cracker
under the Settee [a literary work] was to be replaced in the curriculum by an episode of
Waterloo Road [a British television series], it’s not unimaginable that English teachers stood
poised, quills aloft, ready to defend the body of work that has shaped the modern world, to
the death. Well, to the staffroom and the discussion forums at least. …
From the linguistic2 perspective, studying classic literature from the Western canon
(Shakespeare, Dickens, Orwell and so on) affords students of English the opportunity to
understand, analyse, and evaluate language quite different from their own. Structures, trends
in punctuation and in the way we speak have evolved through the ages and being aware of
these developments really helps us to understand better, language in its current context.
If we didn’t read and study texts from the past, and only looked to the best seller list,
how would we know of this evolution? In my experience, pupils’ creativity runs rampant3
when they can remix particular structures and styles with their own writing to lend
authenticity to character, story, and setting.
One of the challenges teachers face is the need to edge learners beyond their comfort
zones but in doing so, we challenge their thinking and we bolster their confidence to become
even more skilled in the use of their own language. Or as the CBI (Confederation of British
Industry) might say, we’re equipping them with essential skills for the real world.
There are more benefits to the study of literature. Understanding a story through the
experiences of a character enables us to feel what it could have been like and helps us
consider the impact of events, significant or otherwise, on ordinary people. Gaining a broad
view of society, through the eyes of another, fosters understanding, tolerance and empathy4
and the value of these capacities cannot be underestimated in today’s world.
Understanding the past does, we hope, prevent us from repeating the mistakes of our
predecessors but, more than that, it helps us appreciate how attitudes have changed over
time. This, in turn, promotes a deeper understanding of why we are who we are today.
While we must safeguard the teaching of classic literature or risk depriving our young
people of the wealth of knowledge, enjoyment and sense of heritage and history to be gained
from our classics, we should also be open to the idea that more contemporary texts, of varying
titles and formats, have a justifiable place in the curriculum too.
1honing — perfecting
2linguistic — the study of language
3rampant — wild
4empathy — an understanding of others’ feelings and experiences
20
25
30
35
10
5
15
40
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [18]
Any text, if taught well, will engage on some level or another. A few years ago I received
a thank you card from a student at the end of her school career but it didn’t convey the usual
gratitude for helping her complete the course, or for getting her through the exam. It simply
read: “Thank you for introducing me to beautiful literature – I have learned so much from
it.” And that golden moment is enough to convince me that great literature, from any time,
is something that all our young people should be entitled to. That’s the point.
—Sally Law
excerpted and adapted from “Classic Works of Literature Still Have a Place in
Today’s Classrooms”
www.theguardian.com, December 11, 2012
45
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [19] [OVER]
Text 4
Giving High School Students the Tools to Question Classic Literature
Generations of students have read Shakespeare and Hemingway for high school literature
class and Jeanne Dyches, assistant professor in Iowa State University’s School of Education,
would like students to question that tradition.
“As a field, we need to think about how our disciplines are advancing certain stories,
silencing certain stories and socializing our students to think that what we’re teaching them
is neutral,” Dyches said. “We need to have a conversation around why certain texts are taught
year after year.”
The titles often at the top of high school reading lists are considered “classics” or required
for “cultural literacy,” she said. However, the authors — typically white European men — do
not reflect the diversity of students in the classroom. Dyches says assigning these texts without
questioning issues of race or gender may exclude students who do not see themselves in the
text, and make them feel their voices are not valued. This lack of questioning also normalizes
the experiences of students who belong to dominant groups.
That is why Dyches encourages educators to consider the ideology ingrained1 in the texts
they assign, and give students the tools to question what they are reading. For a new paper,
published by Harvard Educational Review, Dyches spent time in a high school literature
class teaching students to critically examine and question the discipline of English language
arts. …
Her research found the lessons sharpened students’ awareness and recognition of
messages of power and oppression within classic literature. By the end of the study, 77
percent of students — a 27 percent increase — recognized the politicized nature of teaching
these traditional texts. Dyches says while most students were uncomfortable talking about
oppression and injustice in a specific text, students of color demonstrated more awareness
of these issues.
“We all have different experiences and reactions when we’re having conversations that
challenge us to question and consider race, gender, and sexuality and all the messy
intersections,” Dyches said. “It’s OK for students who have never heard these things to still
be grappling with their own racial understanding and social-cultural identity. But we must still
create opportunities for students to learn, wrestle with and apply new critical lenses to their
educational experiences and the world around them.”
Bland, yet timeless
Dyches surveyed students at the beginning and end of the study to understand their
perceptions and relationships with the texts they were reading in literature class. In their
responses, students described the texts as “bland and ineffective,” adding that they “can’t
relate to any of it,” yet they still considered the titles to be “timeless” and important “to
improve upon their reading and writing skills.” Dyches said students read the texts because
they believed doing so would prepare them for college.
Their responses illustrate a commonly held belief about the “value” of classic literature,
which is based more on tradition than literary standards, Dyches said. The problem is
students and educators alike do not think to question why this is the case. In fact, Dyches says
until she started researching social justice issues, she was unaware of the historical
perspectives and ideologies she promoted through the texts she assigned.
1ingrained — firmly established
20
25
30
35
40
10
5
15
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [20]
Not only does she want to empower students to question what they’re reading in class,
Dyches also wants teachers to recognize the political context of their decisions. Educators,
like all people, have different biases or beliefs, Dyches said. However, if teachers know this
and address those biases in the classroom, she says that is a step in the right direction.
“We’re all political beings and whether you recognize it or not, you’re always teaching
from your belief systems. It’s essential to recognize and understand how our ideas or beliefs
influence our teaching. I would argue you’re being just as political when you assign ‘Macbeth’
as when you assign ‘The Hate U Give,’” Dyches said. …
—Iowa State University
excerpted from “Giving High School Students the Tools to Question Classic Literature”
www.sciencedaily.com, January 29, 2019
45
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [21] [OVER]
Part 3
Text-Analysis Response
Your Task: Closely read the text provided on pages 22 and 23 and write a well-developed, text-based response
of two to three paragraphs. In your response, identify a central idea in the text and analyze how the author’s use
of one writing strategy (literary element or literary technique or rhetorical device) develops this central idea.
Use strong and thorough evidence from the text to support your analysis. Do not simply summarize the text. You
may use the margins to take notes as you read and scrap paper to plan your response. Write your response in
the spaces provided on pages 7 through 9 of your essay booklet.
Guidelines:
Be sure to:
• Identify a central idea in the text
• Analyze how the author’s use of one writing strategy (literary element or literary technique or rhetorical
device) develops this central idea. Examples include: characterization, conflict, denotation/connotation,
metaphor, simile, irony, language use, point-of-view, setting, structure, symbolism, theme, tone, etc.
• Use strong and thorough evidence from the text to support your analysis
• Organize your ideas in a cohesive and coherent manner
• Maintain a formal style of writing
• Follow the conventions of standard written English
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [22]
Why Do We Fly?
…During the five or ten minutes I had watched the herd of game spread like a barbaric
invasion across the plain, I had unconsciously observed, almost in their midst, a pool of
water bright as a splinter from a glazier’s1 table. …
Like the date palm on the Russian steppes, this crystal pool in the arid roughness of
the Serengetti was not only incongruous, it was impossible. And yet, without the slightest
hesitation, I flew over it and beyond it until it was gone from sight and from my thoughts.
There is no twilight in East Africa. Night tramps on the heels of Day with little gallantry
and takes the place she lately held, in severe and humourless silence. Sounds of the things
that live in the sun are quickly gone — and with them the sounds of roving aeroplanes,
if their pilots have learned the lessons there are to learn about night weather, distances
that seem never to shrink, and the perfidy2 of landing fields that look like aerodromes by
day, but vanish in darkness.
I watched small shadows creep from the rocks and saw birds in black flocks homeward
bound to the scattered bush, and I began to consider my own home and a hot bath and
food. Hope always persists beyond reason, and it seemed futile to nurse any longer the
expectation of finding Woody with so much of the afternoon already gone. If he were
not dead, he would of course light fires by night, but already my fuel was low, I had no
emergency rations — and no sleep.
I had touched my starboard rudder, altering my course east for Nairobi, when the
thought first struck me that the shining bit of water I had so calmly flown over was not water
at all, but the silvered wings of a Klemm monoplane bright and motionless in the path of
the slanting sun. …
But before considering any of this, I had already reversed my direction, lost altitude,
and opened the throttle again. It was a race with racing shadows, a friendly trial between
the sun and me.
As I flew, my hunch became conviction. Nothing in the world, I thought, could have
looked so much like reflecting water as the wings of Woody’s plane. I remembered how
bright those wings had been when last I saw them, freshly painted to shine like silver or
stainless steel. Yet they were only of flimsy wood and cloth and hardened glue.
The deception had amused Woody. ‘All metal,’ he would say, jerking a thumb toward
the Klemm; ‘all metal, except just the wings and fuselage3 and prop and little things like
that. Everything else is metal — even the engine.’
Even the engine! — as much of a joke to us as to the arrant winds of Equatorial Africa;
a toy engine with bustling manner and frantic voice; an hysterical engine, guilty at last
perhaps of what, in spite of Woody’s jokes and our own, we all had feared.
Now almost certainly guilty, I thought, for there at last was what I hunted — not an
incredible pool of water, but, unmistakable this time, the Klemm huddled to earth like
a shot bird, not crushed, but lifeless and alone, beside it no fire, not even a stick with a
fluttering rag. …
I throttled down, allowing just enough revs to prevent the ship from stalling at the slow
speed required to land in so small a space. Flattening out and swinging the tail from side to
side in order to get what limited vision I could at the ground below and directly ahead,
I flew in gently and brought the Avian to earth in a surprisingly smooth run. I made a
1glazier’s — glass cutter’s
2perfidy — betrayal
3fuselage — body of the plane
20
25
30
35
10
5
15
40
Regents Exam in ELA — Jan. ’24 [23]
mental note at the time that the take-off, especially if Woody were aboard, might be a good
deal more difficult.
But there was no Woody.
I climbed out, got my dusty and dented water bottle from the locker, and walked over
to the Klemm, motionless and still glittering in the late light. I stood in front of her wings
and saw no sign of mishap, and heard nothing. There she rested, frail and feminine, against
the rough, grey ground, her pretty wings unmarked, her propeller rakishly tilted, her cock-
pit empty. …
I found a path with the grass bent down and little stones scuffed from their hollows, and
I followed it past some larger stones into a tangle of thorn trees. I shouted for Woody and
got nothing but my own voice for an answer, but when I turned my head to shout again,
I saw two boulders leaning together, and in the cleft they made were a pair of legs clothed
in grimy work slacks and, beyond the legs, the rest of Woody, face down with his head in
the crook of his arm.
I went over to where he was, unscrewed the cap of the water bottle and leaned down
and shook him. …
Woody began to back out of the cleft of the rocks with a motion irrelevantly
reminiscent4 of the delectable crayfish of the South of France. He was mumbling, and
I recalled that men dying of thirst are likely to mumble and that what they want is water.
I poured a few drops on the back of his neck as it appeared and got, for my pains, a startled
grunt. It was followed by a few of those exquisite words common to the vocabularies of
sailors, airplane pilots, and stevedores — and then abruptly Woody was sitting upright on
the ground, his face skinny beneath a dirty beard, his lips cinder-dry and split, his eyes
red-rimmed and sunk in his cheeks. He was a sick man and he was grinning. …
‘Why do we fly?’ said Woody. ‘We could do other things. We could work in offices, or
have farms, or get into the Civil Service. We could…’
‘We could give up flying tomorrow. You could, anyhow. You could walk away from your
plane and never put your feet on a rudder bar again. You could forget about weather and
night flights and forced landings, and passengers who get airsick, and spare parts that you
can’t find, and wonderful new ships that you can’t buy. You could forget all that and go off
somewhere away from Africa and never look at an aerodrome again. You might be a very
happy man, so why don’t you?’
‘I couldn’t bear it,’ said Woody. ‘It would all be so dull.’ …
—Beryl Markham
“Why Do We Fly?”
excerpted from West With the Night, 2013
North Point Press
4reminiscent — suggestive
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
REGENTS IN ELA
REGENTS IN ELA
Printed on Recycled Paper